version of the new testament called the pshitta or peshitta as one of the words 
jesus used to refer to god e g in the sixth beatitude blessed are the pure in 
heart for they shall see al ha and in the arabic bible the same words mt five 
eight other beliefs the nation of gods and earths one of the many sects created 
as the result of black separatist movements in the united states holds that the 
word all h is the name of the original black man and stands for arm leg leg arm 
head this concept is alien to mainstream islam which strictly opposes any 
attempt to portray all h as a human or in any other way mainstream islam also 
prohibits attibuting divine qualities to worshipping or glorifying anything 
other than all h the bah faith whose are primarily written in arabic and farsi 
also uses allah to mean god though in practice the customary word for god in 
the local language is typically used when speaking in that language some 
particular uses are not translated but the arabic phrase is used the chief 
example of this would be the bah customary greeting all h u abh which is 
commonly translated as god is the all glorious see also god islam nine nine 
names of god muhammad monotheism external links islam way online your religion 
and spirituality portal for further discussion on allah the word s etymology 
and the islamic concept islam arabian deities deities quran singular god aqidah 
for the kim stanley robinson novel see antarctica novel antarctica greek 
antarktikos opposite the arctic is a continent encircling the earth s south 
pole surrounded by the southern ocean and divided in two by the transantarctic 
mountains it is a cold desert and on average the coldest place on earth nine 
eight of the continent is covered by ice its one four million km make it the 
fifth largest continent and the world s largest desert there are no permanent 
human residents and only cold adapted plants and animals survive there 
including penguins fur seals lichens and hundreds of types of algae although 
myths and speculation about a terra australis southern land go back to 
antiquity the first commonly accepted sighting of the continent occurred in one 
eight two zero and the first verified landing in one eight two one by the 
russian expedition of mikhail lazarev and fabian gottlieb von bellingshausen 
the continent had been largely neglected in the one nine th century because of 
its hostile environment lack of efficient resources and its isolated location 
antarctica is not under the political sovereignty of any nation although seven 
countries argentina australia chile france norway new zealand and the united 
kingdom maintain territorial claims most other countries do not recognise these 
claims and the claims of argentina chile and the united kingdom all overlap its 
usage is regulated by the antarctic treaty signed in one nine five nine by one 
two countries which prohibits any military activity supports scientific 
research and protects the continent s ecozone ongoing experiments are conducted 
yearly by more than four zero zero zero scientists of diverse backgrounds and 
interests exploration the endurance at night during ernest shackleton s 
imperial trans antarctic expedition in one nine one four in the western world 
beliefs in a terra australis a vast continent located in the far south of the 
globe to balance out the northern lands of europe asia and north africa had 
existed for centuries even by late in the one seven th century after explorers 
had found that south america and australia were not part of antarctica 
geographers believed the continent was much larger than its true size european 
maps continued to show this land until captain james cook and the crews of his 
expedition s ships resolution and adventure crossed the antarctic circle on 
january one seven one seven seven three and again in one seven seven four the 
first confirmed sighting of antarctica cannot be accurately attributed to one 
single person it can however be narrowed down to three individuals according to 
various organizations the national science foundation nasa the university of 
california san diego and other sources three men all sighted antarctica within 
days or weeks of each other fabian von bellingshausen a captain in the russian 
imperial navy edward bransfield a captain in the british navy and nathaniel 
palmer an american sealer out of stonington connecticut bransfield supposedly 
saw antarctica on january two seven one eight two zero three days before palmer 
sighted land it is certain that on january two eight one eight two zero the 
expedition led by fabian von bellingshausen and mikhail petrovich lazarev on 
two ships reached a point within three two km two zero miles of the antarctic 
mainland and saw ice fields there in one eight four one explorer james clark 
ross sailed through what is now known as the ross sea and discovered ross 
island he sailed along a huge wall of ice that was later named the ross ice 
shelf mount erebus and mount terror are named after two ships from his 
expedition hms erebus and hms terror during an expedition by ernest shackleton 
parties led by t w edgeworth david became the first to climb mount erebus and 
to reach the south magnetic pole on december one four one nine one one a party 
led by norwegian polar explorer roald amundsen from the ship fram became the 
first to reach the south pole using a route from the bay of whales and up the 
axel heiberg glacier after robert falcon scott s journey richard evelyn byrd 
led several voyages to the antarctic by plane in the one nine three zero s and 
one nine four zero s he is credited with implementing mechanized land transport 
and conducting extensive geological and biological research however it was not 
until october three one one nine five six that anyone set foot on the south 
pole again on that day a u s navy group led by rear admiral george dufek 
successfully landed on an aircraft geography a satellite composite image of 
antarctica the continent of antarctica is located mostly south of the antarctic 
circle surrounded by the southern ocean antarctica is the southernmost land 
mass on earth comprising more than one four million km making it the five th 
largest continent the coastline measures one seven nine six eight km physically 
antarctica is divided in two by the transantarctic mountains close to the neck 
between the ross sea and the weddell sea the portion of the continent west of 
the weddell sea and east of the ross sea is called western antarctica and the 
remainder eastern antarctica because they correspond roughly to the eastern and 
western hemispheres relative to the greenwich meridian western antarctica is 
covered by the west antarctic ice sheet about nine eight percent of antarctica 
is covered by an ice sheet that is on average two five kilometers thick vinson 
massif the highest peak in antarctica at four eight nine two meters is located 
in the ellsworth mountains the west antarctic ice sheet has been of recent 
concern because of the slight possibility of its collapse if it does break down 
ocean levels would rise by a few meters in a relatively short period of time 
despite its zero rainfall in some areas the continent has approximately nine 
zero of the world s fresh water in the form of ice mt erebus an active volcano 
in ross island although antarctica is home to many volcanoes only deception 
island and mt erebus are active mount erebus located in ross island is the 
southernmost active volcano on earth minor eruptions are frequent and lava flow 
has been observed in recent years other dormant volcanoes may potentially be 
active in two zero zero four an underwater volcano was found in the antarctic 
peninsula by american and canadian researchers recent evidence shows this 
unnamed volcano may be active antarctica is home to more than seven zero lakes 
that lie thousands of metres under the surface of the continental ice sheet 
including one under the south pole itself lake vostok discovered beneath russia 
s vostok station in one nine nine six is the largest of these subglacial lakes 
it is believed that the lake has been sealed off for three five million years 
there is some evidence that vostok s waters may contain microbial life due to 
the lake s similarity to europa a moon of jupiter confirming that life can 
survive in lake vostok might strengthen the argument for the presence of life 
on europa geology gondwana breakup more than one seven zero million years ago 
mya antarctica was part of the supercontinent gondwana africa separated from 
antarctica around one six zero mya follwed by india in the early cretaceous 
about one two five mya about six five mya antarctica then still connected to 
australia had still tropical to subtropical climate complete with a marsupial 
fauna but by about four five mya australia new guinea had separated from 
antarctica and the first ice appeared at around two five mya due to the opening 
of the drake passage between antarctica and south america and the resulting 
antarctic circumpolar current the ice spread quickly displacing the forests 
that then covered the continent since about one five mya the continent has been 
mostly covered with ice climate the blue ice covering lake fryxell in the 
transantarctic mountains comes from glacial meltwater from the canada glacier 
and other smaller glaciers antarctica is the coldest place on earth antarctica 
has little rainfall with the south pole getting none making it a continental 
desert temperatures reach a minimum of between eight five and nine zero degrees 
celsius one two one and one three zero degrees fahrenheit in the winter and 
about three zero degrees higher in the summer months sunburn is often a health 
issue as the snow surface reflects over nine zero of the sunlight falling on it 
eastern antarctica is colder than its western counterpart because of its higher 
elevation weather fronts rarely penetrate far into the continent leaving the 
center cold and dry there is little precipitation over the central portion of 
the continent but ice there can last for extended time periods however heavy 
snowfalls are not uncommon on the coastal portion of the continent where 
snowfalls of up to one two two meters four eight inches in four eight hours 
have been recorded at the edge of the continent strong katabatic winds off the 
polar plateau often blow at storm force in the interior however wind speeds are 
often moderate during summer more solar radiation reaches the surface at the 
south pole than is received at the equator in an equivalent period depending on 
the latitude long periods of constant darkness or constant sunlight mean that 
climates familiar to humans are not generally available on the continent the 
aurora australis commonly known as the southern lights is a glow observed in 
the night sky near the south pole another unique spectacle is diamond dust 
diamond dust refers to a ground level cloud composed of tiny ice crystals 
diamond dust generally forms under otherwise clear or nearly clear skies so 
people sometimes also refer to it as clear sky precipitation a sundog a 
frequent atmospheric optical phenomenon is a bright spot beside the true sun 
tabletop icebergs in antarctica population two american researchers studying 
plankton through microscopes although antarctica has no permanent residents a 
number of governments maintain permanent research stations throughout the 
continent the population of persons doing and supporting science on the 
continent and its nearby islands varies from approximately four zero zero zero 
in summer to one zero zero zero in winter many of the stations are staffed 
around the year emilio marcos palma was the first person born in antarctica 
base esperanza in one nine seven eight his parents being sent there along with 
seven other families by the argentinean government to determine if family life 
was suitable in the continent in one nine eight six juan pablo camacho was born 
at the presidente eduardo frei montalva base becoming the first chilean born in 
antarctica several bases are now home to families with children attending 
schools at the station flora and fauna flora more than two zero zero species of 
lichens are known in antarctica the climate of antarctica does not allow for 
much vegetation to exist a combination of freezing temperatures soil quality 
lack of moisture and sunlight limit the chances for plants to exist as a result 
plant life is limited to mostly mosses and liverworts the autotrophic community 
is made up of mostly protists the flora of the continent largely consists of 
lichens bryophytes algae and fungi growth generally occurs in the summer and 
only for a few weeks at most there are more than two zero zero species of 
lichens and approximately five zero species of bryophytes such as mosses seven 
hundred species of algae exist most of which are phytoplankton multicolored 
snow algae and diatoms are especially abundant in the coastal regions during 
the summer there are two species of flowering plants found in the antarctic 
peninsula antarctic hair grass and antarctic pearlwort fauna emperor penguins 
in ross sea antarctica land fauna is completely invertebrate such invertebrate 
life includes microscopic mites lice and springtails the midge just one two mm 
in size is the largest land animal in antarctica other than man the snow petrel 
is one of only three birds that breed exclusively in antarctica and have been 
seen at the south pole a variety of marine animals exist and they rely directly 
or indirectly on the phytoplankton antarctic sea life includes penguins blue 
whales and fur seals more specifically the emperor penguin is the only penguin 
that breeds during the winter in antarctica the ad lie penguin breeds further 
south than any penguin the rockhopper penguin has distinctive feathers around 
the eyes one could call them elaborate eyelashes king penguins are also 
predominant in the antarctic the antarctic fur seal was very heavily hunted in 
the one eight th and one nine th centuries for its pelt by sealers from the 
united states and the united kingdom antarctic krill which congregate in large 
schools is the keystone species of the ecosystem of the southern ocean and is 
an important food organism for whales seals leopard seals fur seals squid 
icefish penguins albatrosses and many other birds the approval of the antarctic 
conservation act brought several restrictions to the continent the introduction 
of alien plants or animals can bring a criminal penalty as can the extraction 
of any indigenous species the overfishing of krill which plays a large role in 
the antarctic ecosystem led officials to enact regulations on fishing the 
convention for the conservation of antarctic marine living resources ccamlr a 
treaty enacted in one nine eight zero requires that regulations managing all 
southern ocean fisheries consider potential effects on the entire antarctic 
ecosystem despite these new acts unregulated and illegal fishing particularly 
of patagonian toothfish remains a serious problem particularly the illegal 
fishing of toothfish has been increasing with estimates of three two zero zero 
zero tonnes in two zero zero zero underwater field guide to ross island operaci 
n nine zero undertaken one zero years before the antarctic treaty by the 
argentinian military the united states military issues the antarctica service 
medal to military members or civilians who perform research duty on the 
antarctica continent the medal may include a winter over bar issued to those 
who remain on the continent for two complete six month seasons antarctic 
territories territorial claims of antarctica the argentinean british and 
chilean claims all overlap germany also maintained a claim to antarctica known 
as new swabia between one nine three nine and one nine four five it was 
situated at two zero e and one zero w overlapping norway s claim economy the 
illegal capture and sale of the patagonian toothfish has led to several arrests 
although coal hydrocarbons iron ore platinum copper chromium nickel gold and 
other minerals have been found they exist in quantities too small to exploit 
the one nine nine one protocol on environmental protection to the antarctic 
treaty prevents such struggle for resources in one nine nine eight a compromise 
agreement was reached to add a five zero year ban on mining until the year two 
zero four eight further limiting economic development and exploitation the 
primary agricultural activity is the capture and offshore trading of fish 
antarctic fisheries in two zero zero zero zero one reported landing one one two 
nine three four metric tons small scale tourism has existed since one nine five 
seven as of two zero zero six several ships transport people into antarctica 
for specific scenic locations a total of one three five seven one tourists 
visited in the two zero zero two zero three antarctic summer with nearly all of 
them coming from commercial ships the average stay is about two weeks antarctic 
flights brought tourists from australia and new zealand until the fatal crash 
of air new zealand flight nine zero one in one nine seven nine near mount 
erebus research a full moon and two five second exposure allowed sufficient 
light into this photo taken at amundsen scott south pole station during the 
long antarctic night the new station can be seen at far left power plant in the 
center and the old mechanic s garage in the lower right each year scientists 
from two seven different nations conduct experiments not reproducible in any 
other place in the world but the antarctic in the summer more than four zero 
zero zero scientists operate research stations this number decreases to nearly 
one zero zero zero in the winter the mcmurdo station is capable of housing more 
than a thousand scientists visitors and tourists researchers include biologists 
geologists oceanographers physicists astronomers glaciologists and 
meteorologists geologists tend to study plate tectonics in the arctic region 
meteorites from the outer space and resources from the breakup of the 
supercontinent gondwanaland glaciologists in antarctica are concerned with the 
study of the history and dynamics of floating ice seasonal snow glaciers and 
ice sheets biologists in addition to examining the wildlife are interested in 
how harsh temperatures and the presence of people affect adaptation and 
survival strategies in a wide variety of organisms astrophysicists in amundsen 
scott south pole station are able to study the celestial dome and cosmic 
microwave background radiation because of the ozone hole and the location s dry 
cold environment medical physicians have made discoveries concerning the 
spreading of viruses and the body s response to extreme seasonal temperatures 
since the one nine seven zero s an important focus of study has been the ozone 
layer in the atmosphere above antarctica in one nine nine eight nasa satellite 
data showed that the antarctic ozone hole was the largest on record covering 
two seven million square kilometers in two zero zero two significant areas of 
ice shelves disintegrated in response to regional warming antarctic meteorite 
named alh eight four zero zero one from mars meteorites from antarctica are a 
relatively recent resource for study of the material formed early in the solar 
system most are thought to come from asteroids but some may have originated on 
larger planets the first meteorites in antarctica were found in one nine one 
two in one nine six nine the japanese discovered nine meteorites in antarctica 
most of these meteorites have fallen onto the ice sheet in the last one million 
years motion of the ice sheet tends to concentrate the meteorites at blocking 
locations such as mountain ranges with wind erosion bringing them to the 
surface after centuries beneath accumulated snowfall compared with meteorites 
collected in more temperate regions on earth the antarctic meteorites are 
relatively well preserved this large collection of meteorites allows a better 
understanding of the abundance of meteorite types in the solar system and how 
meteorites relate to asteroids and comets new types of meteorites and rare 
meteorites have been found among these meteorites are pieces blasted off the 
moon and probably mars by impacts these specimens specifically alh eight four 
zero zero one discovered by ansmet are at the center of the controversy about 
possible evidence of microbial life on early mars because meteorites in space 
absorb and record cosmic radiation the time elapsed since the meteorite hit the 
earth can be determined from laboratory studies the elapsed time since fall or 
terrestrial residence age of a meteorite represents more information that might 
be useful in environmental studies of antarctic ice sheets see also list of 
antarctic and sub antarctic islands antarctica ecozone antarctic stamps 
antarctic treaty system argentine antarctic geopolitics brazil antarctic 
geopolitics chile antarctic geopolitics communications in antarctica extreme 
points of antarctica flags of antarctica life in the freezer a bbc natural 
history television series on life on and around antarctica transportation in 
antarctica footnotes external links antarctic treaty secretariat anetstation 
radio station in antarctica the antarctic digital database a source of digital 
topographic map data for antarctica australian antarctic division british 
antarctic survey biodiversity at ardley island south shetland archipelago 
antarctica council of managers of national antarctic programs comnap official 
homepage german antarctic ships and stations portals on the world antarctica 
from the library of congress the russian state museum of arctic and antarctic 
the scientific committee for antarctic research coordinating body for antarctic 
science the world factbook antarctica from the u s central intelligence agency 
latest antarctic news and information by seven zero south international 
association of antarctic tour operators iaato the united states antartic 
program antarctic place names commission of bulgaria one of many journals by a 
tourist to antarctica antarctica antarctica continents lists of coordinates 
outposts of antarctica special territories the argentine republic spanish rep 
blica argentina ipa is a country in south america situated between the andes in 
the west and the southern atlantic ocean in the east and south it is bordered 
by paraguay and bolivia in the north brazil and uruguay in the northeast and 
chile in the west and south it also claims the british overseas territories of 
the falkland islands spanish islas malvinas and south georgia and the south 
sandwich islands under the name of argentine antarctica it claims around one 
zero zero zero zero zero zero square kilometres three eight six zero zero zero 
sq mi of antarctica overlapping other claims by chile and the united kingdom by 
area it is the second largest country of south america after brazil and the 
eight th largest country in the world the country is formally named rep blica 
argentina argentine republic while for purposes of legislation the form naci n 
argentina argentine nation is used origin and history of the name the name 
argentina derives from the latin argentum silver the first spanish 
conquistadors called the river plate the r o de la plata river of silver 
indigenous people gave silver gifts to the survivors of the shipwrecked 
expedition who were led by juan d az de sol s the legend of sierra del plata a 
mountain rich in silver reached spain around one five two four the name 
argentina was first used in ruy d az de guzm n s one six one two book historia 
del descubrimiento poblaci n y conquista del r o de la plata history of the 
discovery population and conquest of the r o de la plata naming the territory 
tierra argentina land of silver history the area of present argentina was 
sparsely populated until it was colonised by europeans the native people known 
as diaguita lived in northwestern argentina on the edge of the expanding inca 
empire the guaran lived farther east europeans arrived in one five zero two 
spain established a permanent colony on the site of buenos aires in one five 
eight zero and the viceroyalty of the r o de la plata in one seven seven six 
independence from spain was declared on july nine one eight one six centralist 
and federationist groups were in conflict until national unity was established 
and the constitution promulgated in one eight five three foreign investment and 
immigration from europe aided the introduction of modern agricultural 
techniques and integration of argentina into the world economy in the late one 
nine th century in the one eight eight zero s the conquest of the desert 
subdued or exterminated the remaining native tribes throughout patagonia from 
one eight eight zero to one nine three zero argentina became one of the ten 
wealthiest nations conservative forces dominated argentine politics until one 
nine one six when their traditional rivals the radicals won control of the 
government the military forced hip lito yrigoyen from power in one nine three 
zero leading to another decade of conservative rule political change led to the 
presidency of juan per n in one nine four six who aimed at empowering the 
working class and greatly expanded the number of unionised workers the revoluci 
n libertadora of one nine five five deposed him in the one nine five zero s and 
one nine six zero s military and civilian administrations traded power when 
military governments failed to revive the economy and suppress escalating 
terrorism in the late one nine six zero s and early one nine seven zero s the 
way was open for per n s return to the presidency in one nine seven three with 
his third wife mar a estela isabel mart nez de per n as vice president during 
this period extremists on the political left and political right carried out 
terrorist acts with a frequency that threatened public order bank of the 
argentine nation buenos aires per n died in one nine seven four his wife 
succeeded him in office but a military coup removed her from office in one nine 
seven six and the armed forces formally exercised power through a junta in 
charge of the self appointed national reorganisation process until one nine 
eight three the armed forces repressed opposition using harsh illegal measures 
the dirty war thousands of dissidents were disappeared while the side 
cooperated with the cia dina and other south american intelligence agencies in 
operation condor many of the military leaders that took part in the dirty war 
were trained in the u s financed school of the americas among them argentine 
dictators leopoldo galtieri and roberto viola economic problems charges of 
corruption public revulsion in the face of human rights abuses and finally the 
country s one nine eight two defeat in the falklands war discredited the 
argentine military regime democracy was restored in one nine eight three ra l 
alfons n s radical government took steps intending to account for the 
disappeared establishing civilian control of the armed forces and consolidating 
democratic institutions failure to resolve endemic economic problems and an 
inability to maintain public confidence caused his early departure president 
carlos menem imposed peso dollar fixed exchange rate in one nine nine one to 
stop hyperinflation and adopted far reaching market based policies dismantling 
protectionist barriers and business regulations and implementing a 
privatisation program these reforms contributed to significant increases in 
investment and growth with stable prices through most of the one nine nine zero 
s the menem and de la r a administrations faced diminished competitiveness of 
exports massive imports which damaged national industry and reduced employment 
chronic fiscal and trade deficits and the contagion of several economic crises 
the asian financial crisis in one nine nine eight precipitated an outflow of 
capital that mushroomed into a recession which led to a total freezing of the 
bank accounts the corralito and culminated in a financial panic in november two 
zero zero one the next month amidst bloody riots president de la r a resigned 
several new presidents followed in quick succession argentina defaulted on its 
international debt obligations the peso s almost one two year old link with the 
dollar was abandoned resulting in massive currency depreciation and inflation 
in turn triggering a spike in unemployment and poverty in two zero zero three n 
stor kirchner became the president and started implementing new policies based 
on re industrialisation import substitution increased exports consistent fiscal 
surplus and high exchange rate politics congress building in buenos aires the 
argentine constitution of one eight five three as revised in one nine nine four 
mandates a separation of powers into executive legislative and judicial 
branches at the national and provincial level the president and vice president 
are directly elected to four year terms both are limited to two consecutive 
terms they are allowed to stand for a third term or more after an interval of 
at least one term the president appoints cabinet ministers and the constitution 
grants him considerable power as both head of state and head of government 
including authority to enact laws by presidential decree under conditions of 
urgency and necessity and the line item veto argentina s parliament is the 
bicameral national congress or congreso de la naci n consisting of a senate 
senado of seven two seats and a chamber of deputies c mara de diputados of two 
five seven members since two zero zero one senators have been directly elected 
with each province including the federal capital represented by three senators 
senators serve six year terms one third of the senate stands for reelection 
every two years via a partial majority system in each district members of the 
chamber of deputies are directly elected to four year term via a system of 
proportional representation voters elect half the members of the lower house 
every two years foreign relations argentina is currently prompting the mercosur 
as its first external priority contrasting with the one nine nine zero s 
emphasis in the relationship with the united states administrative divisions 
provinces of argentina argentine antarctica and southern atlantic islands two 
three not shown argentina is divided into two three provinces provincias 
singular provincia and one autonomous city commonly known as capital federal 
marked with an asterisk the current official name for the federal district is 
ciudad aut noma de buenos aires buenos aires has been the capital of argentina 
since its unification but there have been projects to move the administrative 
centre elsewhere during the presidency of ra l alfons n a law was passed 
ordering the move of the federal capital to viedma a city in the patagonic 
province of r o negro studies were underway when hyperinflation in one nine 
eight nine killed off the project though the law was never formally repealed it 
has become a mere historical relic and the project has been forgotten 
urbanization government house of tucum n about two seven million people live in 
the autonomous city of buenos aires and roughly one one five million in greater 
buenos aires two zero zero one making it one of the largest urban conglomerates 
in the world together with their respective metropolitan areas the second and 
third largest cities in argentina c rdoba and rosario comprise about one three 
and one one million inhabitants respectively most european immigrants to 
argentina coming in great waves especially around the world war i and ii 
settled in the cities which offered jobs education and other opportunities that 
enabled newcomers to enter the middle class since the one nine three zero s 
many rural workers have moved to the big cities the one nine nine zero s saw 
many rural towns become ghost towns when train services were abandoned and 
local products manufactured on a small scale were replaced by massive amounts 
of imported cheap goods in part because of the monetary policy which kept the u 
s dollar exchange rate fixed and low many slums villas miseria sprouted in the 
outskirts of the largest cities inhabited by empoverished low class urban 
dwellers and migrants from smaller towns in the interior of the country however 
it is important to note that the majority of the people that live in these 
newly formed small shanty towns are people that came from neighboring countries 
during the time of convertibility and never left this immigration of humble 
people from a low socioeconomic status represented an undesirable change 
because shanty towns and homeless people begging for money was something 
argentines didn t know until the economic disaster of the one nine nine zero s 
however the government works actively to try to include these new inmigrants 
into argentine society and considers their children born in argentina to be 
argentines there are no plans to build any type of wall to keep these 
inmigrants out argentina adheres to a policy of allowing anybody who wants to 
come to argentina to come freely without restrictive inmigration measures in 
this respect argentina is more progressive than many fully developed countries 
argentina s urban areas have a european look reflecting the influence of their 
european settlers many towns and cities are built like spanish cities around a 
main square called a plaza a cathedral and important government buildings often 
face the plaza the general layout of the cities is called a damero that is a 
checkerboard since it is based on a pattern of square blocks though modern 
developments sometimes depart from it for example the city of la plata built at 
the end of the one nine th century is organised as a checkerboard plus diagonal 
avenues at fixed intervals in descending order by number of inhabitants the 
major cities in argentina are buenos aires c rdoba rosario mendoza la plata 
tucum n mar del plata salta santa fe and bah a blanca geography map of 
argentina argentina can roughly be divided into three parts the fertile plains 
of the pampas in the central part of the country the centre of argentina s 
agricultural wealth the flat to rolling plateau of patagonia in the southern 
half down to tierra del fuego and the rugged andes mountain range along the 
western border with chile with the highest point being the cerro aconcagua at 
six nine six zero metres two two eight three four ft major rivers include the 
paraguay bermejo colorado uruguay and the largest river the paran the latter 
two flow together before meeting the atlantic ocean forming the estuary of the 
r o de la plata the argentine climate is predominantly temperate with extremes 
ranging from subtropical in the north to arid sub antarctic in far south 
enclaves and exclaves there is one argentine exclave the island of mart n garc 
a co ordinates it is situated near the confluence of the paran and uruguay 
rivers a mere kilometre zero six two mi inside uruguayan waters about three 
five kilometres two one mi from the uruguayan coastline near the small city of 
mart n chico itself about halfway between nueva palmira and colonia del 
sacramento an agreement reached by argentina and uruguay in one nine seven 
three reaffirmed argentine jurisdiction over the island ending a century old 
dispute between the two countries according to the terms of the agreement mart 
n garc a is to be devoted exclusively to a natural preserve its area is about 
two square kilometres five zero zero acres and the population about two zero 
zero people economy subway station in monserrat buenos aires argentina benefits 
from rich natural resources a highly literate population an export oriented 
agricultural sector and a diversified industrial base the country historically 
had a large middle class compared to other latin american countries but this 
segment of the population was decimated by a succession of economic crises 
today while a significant segment of the population is still financially well 
off they stay in sharp contrast with millions who live in poverty or on the 
brink of it since the late one nine seven zero s the country piled up public 
debt and was plagued by bouts of high inflation in one nine nine one the 
government pegged the peso to the u s dollar and limited the growth in the 
monetary base the government then embarked on a path of trade liberalisation 
deregulation and privatisation inflation dropped and gdp grew but external 
economic shocks and failures of the system diluted its benefits causing it to 
crumble in slow motion from one nine nine five and up to the collapse in two 
zero zero one by two zero zero two argentina had defaulted on its debt its gdp 
had shrunk unemployment was over two five the peso had devalued seven five 
after being floated and inflation was hitting again however careful spending 
control and heavy taxes on now soaring exports gave the state the tools to 
regain resources and conduct monetary policy in two zero zero three import 
substitution policies and soaring exports coupled with a lower inflation and 
expansive economic measures triggered a surge in the gdp which was repeated in 
two zero zero four creating jobs and encouraging internal consumption capital 
flight decreased and foreign investment slowly returned the influx of foreign 
currency from exports created such a huge trade surplus that the central bank 
was forced to buy dollars from the market which it continues to do at the time 
to be accumulated as reserves the situation in two zero zero five is much 
improved but there are still large numbers of unemployed people that beg for 
some money or food especially in the outskirts of buenos aires some of them are 
homeless and there is at least one small non profit humanitarian organisation 
which distributes free food to some of them most days of the week however the 
country is still the most developed country in latin america it boasts the 
highest gdp per capita the highest levels of education measured by university 
attendance and a reasonable infrastructure that in many aspects is equal in 
quality to that found in fully industrialized nations in two zero zero two over 
five seven of the population was below the poverty line at the end of two zero 
zero five it was three four in two zero zero two unemployement had reached over 
two five and now it is one zero gdp per capita has surpassed the previous pre 
recession peek of one nine nine eight it is a very interesting time in 
argentina because the experts agree that if the country makes the right 
decisions it could develop and reclaim its previosly held position in the first 
world so far things are looking good the economy grew eight eight in two zero 
zero three nine zero in two zero zero four and nine one in two zero zero five 
the floor is set so that the economy will grow between six zero and seven five 
in two zero zero six and the government is paying down the foreign debt foreign 
debt now stands at six nine of gdp and is slowly decreasing the argentine 
economy has so much untapped potential that if the country manages to encourage 
the proper level of investment the country could experience growth rates of 
nine zero for this year and years to come demographics night shot of the colon 
theatre in buenos aires argentina unlike most of its neighbouring countries 
argentina s population descends overwhelmingly from europeans the basic 
demographic stock nine seven of the population is made up of descendants of 
spanish italian german and other european settlers waves of immigrants from 
european countries arrived in the late one nine th and early two zero th 
centuries the patagonian chubut valley has a significant welsh descended 
population and retains many aspects of welsh culture other important immigrant 
groups came from germany german colonies were settled in the provinces of entre 
r os misiones formosa c rdoba and the patagonian region as well as in buenos 
aires itself france mostly settled in buenos aires city and province 
scandinavia especially sweden the united kingdom and ireland buenos aires and 
patagonia and eastern european nations such as poland russia ukraine and the 
balkans region especially croatia and serbia and others the overwhelming 
majority of argentina s jewish community numbering about three nine five three 
seven nine also derives from immigrants of northern and eastern european origin 
ashkenazi jews it is the largest jewish community in latin america and fifth 
largest in the world middle eastern immigrants number about five zero zero zero 
zero zero mainly in urban areas small numbers of people from far east asia have 
also settled argentina mainly in buenos aires the first asian argentines were 
of japanese descent but koreans vietnamese and chinese soon followed there are 
also smaller numbers of people from the indian subcontinent culture european 
and modern styles in buenos aires argentine culture has been primarily informed 
and influenced by its european roots buenos aires is undeniably the most 
european city in south america due both to the prevalence of people of italian 
spanish and german descent and to conscious imitation argentine cinema has 
achieved international recognition with films such as the official story and 
nine queens though it has only rarely been taken into account by mainstream 
popular viewers who prefer hollywood type movies even low budget productions 
however have obtained prizes in cinema festivals such as cannes the city of mar 
del plata organizes its own festival dedicated to this art the best known 
element of argentine culture is probably their music and dance particularly 
tango in modern argentina tango music is enjoyed in its own right especially 
since the radical astor piazzolla redefined the music of carlos gardel it must 
be noted that while tango refers mostly to a particular dancing music for 
foreigners the music together with the lyrics often sung in a kind of slang 
called lunfardo are what most argentines primarily mean by tango tango lyrics 
can be considered a kind of poetry since the one nine seven zero s rock and 
roll is also widely appreciated in argentina first during the one nine seven 
zero s and then again at the mid one nine eight zero s and the beginning of the 
one nine nine zero s national rock and roll and pop music experienced bursts of 
popularity with many new bands such as soda stereo and sumo and composers like 
charly garc a and fito p ez becoming important referents of national culture 
buenos aires is also considered the techno electronica country in latin america 
that started with little raves and nowadays is home of important events such as 
creamfields which has the world record of six five zero zero zero people south 
american music conference and many more european classical music is well 
considered in argentina with the col n theater one of the best opera houses in 
the world musicians such as martha argerich and composers like lalo schifrin 
have become internationally famous see also the articles on the cuisine the 
music and the football spanish f tbol of argentina for a prevalent custom among 
argentines see mate for the traditional buenos aires dance see tango language 
women s bridge in puerto madero buenos aires the only official language is 
spanish although some immigrants and indigenous communities have retained their 
original languages in specific points of the country there are for example many 
welsh speaking towns in patagonia and german speaking cities in c rdoba buenos 
aires and cities in the patagonia italian and french is also widely spoken 
argentina is the largest spanish speaking community in the world that employs 
voseo the use of the pronoun vos instead of t associated with some alternate 
verb conjugations the most prevalent dialect is rioplatense with most speakers 
located in the basin of the r o de la plata religion argentina is an 
overwhelmingly christian country the majority of argentina s population eight 
zero is at least nominally roman catholic roman catholicism is supported by the 
state as stipulated in the constitution evangelical churches gained a place in 
argentina especially since the one nine eight zero s and now number more than 
three five million or one zero members of the church of jesus christ of latter 
day saints mormons number over three three zero three zero zero the seventh 
largest concentration in the world traditional protestant communities are also 
present the country also hosts the largest jewish population in latin america 
about three nine five three seven nine strong it is also home to one of the 
largest mosques in latin america serving argentina s small muslim community see 
also argentine antarctica communications in argentina education in argentina 
elections in argentina foreign relations of argentina governors in argentina 
military of argentina national parks of argentina public holidays in argentina 
tourism in argentina transportation in argentina references general information 
general information general information and maps geography and history 
geography and tourism history other information external links government 
gobierno electr nico official government website presidencia de la naci n 
official presidential website honorable senado de la naci n official senatorial 
website honorable c mara de diputados de la naci n official lower house website 
directories library of congress open directory project todalanet search engine 
of argentine only websites news t lam official news agency argentinisches 
tageblatt see article buenos aires herald see article clar n see article diario 
de cuyo san juan la capital see article diario uno mendoza diario los andes 
mendoza el diario paran el tribuno salta infobae buenos aires la voz del 
interior c rdoba la gaceta tucum n la naci n see article la raz n buenos aires 
la nueva provincia bah a blanca p gina one two see article la capital mar del 
plata la voz del pueblo tres arroyos images mundo argentina regions landscapes 
and people south america pictures south america maps south america satellite 
images photos of argentina travel secretaria de turismo de la nacion official 
tourism website directory of travel websites travel tips and a deep look at 
argentine culture guidebook reviews and flight tips travel highlights 
interesting places visitgayba com other jos mar a rosa historian felipe pigna 
historian essential facts and other information council on hemispheric affairs 
latin business chronicle cia world factbook argentina south american countries 
the republic of armenia or armenia armenian hayastan hayq is a landlocked 
eurasian country in the caucasus region bordered by turkey to the west georgia 
to the north azerbaijan to the east and iran and the nakhichevan exclave of 
azerbaijan to the south armenia is a member of the council of europe and the 
commonwealth of independent states and for centuries has been on the crossroads 
between the east and west origin of the name the original armenian name for the 
country was hayq later hayastan translated as the land of haik and consisting 
of the name haik and the persian suffix stan land according to legend haik was 
a great great grandson of noah son of togarmah who was a son of gomer a son of 
noah s son japheth and according to an ancient armenian tradition a forefather 
of all armenians he is said to have settled below mount ararat travelled to 
assist in building the tower of babel and after his return defeated the 
babylonian king bel believed by some researchers to be nimrod on august one one 
two four nine two bc near lake van in the southern part of historic armenia 
presently in turkey hayq was given the name armenia by the surrounding states 
as it was the name of the strongest tribe living in the historic armenian lands 
who called themselves armens it is traditionally derived from armenak or aram 
the great grandson of haik s great grandson and another leader who is according 
to armenian tradition the ancestor of all armenians some jewish and christian 
scholars write that the name armenia was derived from har minni that is 
mountains of minni or mannai pre christian accounts suggest that nairi meaning 
land of rivers was an ancient name for the country s mountainous region first 
used by assyrians around one two zero zero bc while the first recorded 
inscription bearing the name armenia namely the behistun inscription in iran 
dates from five two one bc history armenia has been populated by humans since 
prehistoric times and has been proposed as the site of the biblical garden of 
eden armenia was a regional empire with a rich culture in the years leading up 
to the one st century spanning from the shores of the black sea to the caspian 
sea and the mediterranean sea during the rule of tigranes the great armenia s 
strategic location between two continents has subjected it to invasions by many 
peoples including the assyrians persians greeks romans byzantines arabs turks 
and mongols in ad three zero one armenia became the first country in the world 
to adopt christianity as its official state religion twelve years before the 
roman empire granted christianity official toleration under galerius and some 
three zero four zero years before constantine was baptised there had been 
various pagan communities before christianity but they were converted by an 
influx of christian missionaries having changed between various dynasties 
including parthian iranian roman byzantine arab mongol and persian occupations 
armenia was substantially weakened in one five zero zero s the ottoman empire 
and safavid persia divided armenia among themselves in one eight one three and 
one eight two eight present day armenia consisting of the erivan and karabakh 
khanates within persia was temporarily incorporated into the russian empire 
after a short lived independent republic established after the bolshevik 
revolution in petrograd armenia was incorporated into the ussr between one nine 
two two and one nine three six it existed as the transcaucasian soviet 
federated socialist republic with georgia armenia and azerbaijan and from one 
nine three six to one nine nine one as the armenian ssr during the final years 
of the ottoman empire one nine one five one nine two two a large proportion of 
armenians living in anatolia perished as a result of what is termed the 
armenian genocide regarded by armenians and the vast majority of western 
historians to have been state sponsored mass killings turkish authorities 
however maintain that the deaths were a result of a civil war coupled with 
disease and famine with casualties incurred by both sides most estimates for 
the number of armenians killed range from six five zero zero zero zero to one 
five zero zero zero zero zero and these events are traditionally commemorated 
yearly on april two four armenians and a handful of other countries worldwide 
have been campaigning for official recognition of the events as genocide for 
over three zero years but there are also many countries who are pressured not 
to officially characterize the armenian massacres as genocide armenia remained 
preoccupied by a long conflict with azerbaijan over nagorno karabakh a mostly 
armenian populated enclave that armenians allege stalin had placed in soviet 
azerbaijan a military conflict between armenia and azerbaijan began in one nine 
eight eight and the fighting escalated after both countries gained independence 
from the soviet union in one nine nine one by may one nine nine four when a 
cease fire took hold armenian forces controlled not only nagorno karabakh but 
also the surrounding districts of azerbaijan proper the economies of both 
countries have been hurt in the absence of a peaceful resolution politics the 
government of armenia s stated aim is to build a western style parliamentary 
democracy as the basis of its form of government however international 
observers have questioned the fairness of armenia s parliamentary and 
presidential elections and constitutional referenda since one nine nine five 
citing polling deficiencies lack of cooperation by the electoral commission and 
poor maintenance of electoral lists and polling places for the most part 
however armenia is considered one of the more pro democratic nations in the 
commonwealth of independent states the unicameral parliament also called the 
national assembly is controlled by a coalition of three political parties the 
conservative republican party the armenian revolutionary federation and the 
country of law party the main opposition is composed of several smaller parties 
joined in the justice bloc armenians voted overwhelmingly for independence in a 
september one nine nine one referendum levon ter petrossian was president until 
january one nine nine eight when public demonstrations against his increasingly 
authoritarian regime and his domestic and foreign policies forced his 
resignation in one nine nine nine as the prime minister vazgen sargsian 
parliament speaker karen demirchian and six other officials were killed in the 
attack on the national assembly the country experienced a period of political 
instability president robert kocharian was successful in riding out the unrest 
and currently rules with the support of the parliamentary coalition 
administrative provinces provinces of armenia armenia is divided into one one 
provinces marzer singular marz aragatsotn ararat armavir gegharkunik kotayk 
lori shirak syunik tavush vayots dzor yerevan geography map of armenia armenia 
is a landlocked country in the southern caucasus located between the black and 
caspian seas armenia is bordered on the north and east by georgia and 
azerbaijan and on the south and west by iran and turkey though geographically 
in western asia politically and culturally armenia is closely aligned with 
europe historically armenia has been at the crossroads between europe and 
southwest asia and is therefore seen as a transcontinental nation the republic 
of armenia covering an area of three zero zero zero zero square kilometres one 
one six zero zero sq mi is located in the north east of the armenian highland 
covering four zero zero zero zero zero sq km or one five four zero zero zero sq 
mi otherwise known as historic armenia and considered as the original homeland 
of armenians the terrain is mostly mountainous with fast flowing rivers and few 
forests the climate is highland continental hot summers and cold winters the 
land rises to four zero nine five metres one three four three five ft above sea 
level at mount aragats and no point is below four zero zero metres one three 
one two ft above sea level mount ararat regarded by the armenians as a symbol 
of their land is the highest mountain in the region and used to be part of 
armenia until around one nine one five when it fell to the turks armenia is 
trying to address its environmental problems it has established a ministry of 
nature protection and introduced taxes for air and water pollution and solid 
waste disposal whose revenues are used for environmental protection activities 
armenia is interested in cooperating with other members of the commonwealth of 
independent states cis a group of one two former soviet republics and with 
members of the international community on environmental issues the armenian 
government is working toward closing its nuclear power plant at medzamor near 
yerevan as soon as alternative energy sources are identified economy until 
independence armenia s economy was largely industry based chemicals electronics 
machinery processed food synthetic rubber and textile and highly dependent on 
outside resources agriculture contributed only two zero of net material product 
and one zero of employment before the breakup of the soviet union in one nine 
nine one armenian mines produce copper zinc gold and lead the vast majority of 
energy is produced with fuel imported from russia including gas and nuclear 
fuel for its one nuclear power plant the main domestic energy source is 
hydroelectric small amounts of coal gas and petroleum have not yet been 
developed like other newly independent states of the former soviet union 
armenia s economy suffers from the legacy of a centrally planned economy and 
the breakdown of former soviet trading patterns soviet investment in and 
support of armenian industry has virtually disappeared so that few major 
enterprises are still able to function in addition the effects of the one nine 
eight eight spitak earthquake which killed more than two five zero zero zero 
people and made five zero zero zero zero zero homeless are still being felt the 
conflict with azerbaijan over nagorno karabakh has not been resolved the 
closure of azerbaijani and turkish borders has devastated the economy because 
armenia depends on outside supplies of energy and most raw materials land 
routes through georgia and iran are inadequate or unreliable gdp fell nearly 
six zero from one nine eight nine until one nine nine two one nine nine three 
the national currency the dram suffered hyperinflation for the first years 
after its introduction in one nine nine three nevertheless the government was 
able to make wide ranging economic reforms that paid off in dramatically lower 
inflation and steady growth the one nine nine four cease fire in the nagorno 
karabakh conflict has also helped the economy armenia has had strong economic 
growth since one nine nine five building on the turnaround that began the 
previous year and inflation has been negligible for the past several years new 
sectors such as precious stone processing and jewelry making information and 
communication technology and even tourism are beginning to supplement more 
traditional sectors in the economy such as agriculture this steady economic 
progress has earned armenia increasing support from international institutions 
the international monetary fund imf world bank european bank for reconstruction 
and development ebrd and other international financial institutions ifis and 
foreign countries are extending considerable grants and loans loans to armenia 
since one nine nine three exceed one one billion these loans are targeted at 
reducing the budget deficit stabilizing the currency developing private 
businesses energy the agriculture food processing transportation and health and 
education sectors and ongoing rehabilitation in the earthquake zone the 
government joined the world trade organization on february five two zero zero 
three but one of the main sources of foreign direct investments remains the 
armenian diaspora which finances major parts of the reconstruction of 
infrastructure and other public projects being a growing democratic state 
armenia also hopes to get more financial aid from the western world a liberal 
foreign investment law was approved in june one nine nine four and a law on 
privatization was adopted in one nine nine seven as well as a program on state 
property privatization continued progress will depend on the ability of the 
government to strengthen its macroeconomic management including increasing 
revenue collection improving the investment climate and making strides against 
corruption in the two zero zero six index of economic freedom armenia ranked 
two seven th best tied with japan and ahead of countries like norway spain 
portugal and italy however armenia ranked very low on property rights worse 
than countries like botswana trinidad and tobago in the two zero zero five 
transparency international corruption index armenia ranked eight eight highly 
corrupt demographics armenia has a population of two nine eight two nine zero 
four july two zero zero five est and is the second most densely populated of 
the former soviet republics there has been a problem of population decline due 
to elevated levels of emigration after the break up of the ussr the rates of 
emigration and population decline however have been decreasing in the recent 
years a trend which is expected to continue in fact armenia is expected to 
resume its positive population growth by two zero one zero ethnic armenians 
make up nine seven nine of the population kurds make up one three and russians 
zero five there are smaller communities of assyrians georgians greeks and 
ukrainians most azerbaijanis once a sizable population have left since 
independence nearly all of the armenians in azerbaijan approximately one two 
zero zero zero zero now live in the nagorno karabakh region armenia has a very 
large diaspora eight million by some estimates greatly exceeding the three 
million population of armenia itself with communities existing across the globe 
including france lebanon and north america the predominant religion in armenia 
is christianity the roots of the armenian church go back to the one st century 
ad according to tradition the armenian church was founded by two of jesus 
twelve apostles thaddaeus and bartholomew who preached christianity in armenia 
in the four zero s six zero s ad because of these two founding apostles the 
official name of the armenian church is armenian apostolic church armenia was 
the first nation to adopt christianity as a state religion in ad three zero one 
over nine three of armenian christians belong to the armenian apostolic church 
a form of oriental non chalcedonian orthodoxy which is a very ritualistic 
conservative church roughly comparable to the coptic and syrian churches 
armenia also has a population of catholics both roman and mekhitarist armenian 
uniate one eight zero zero zero zero evangelical protestantsand followers of 
the armenian traditional religion the yazidi kurds who live in the western part 
of the country practise yazidism the armenian catholic church is headquartered 
in bzoummar lebanon ethnic azeris and kurds who lived in the country before the 
karabakh conflict practised islam but most azeris were driven out of armenia 
into azerbaijan between one nine eight eight and one nine nine one at the 
beginning of the conflict during the same period armenia also received a large 
influx of armenians scattered throughout azerbaijan and large number of azeri 
population migrated to azerbaijan culture although located in turkey mount 
ararat here seen from yerevan is the national symbol of armenia mother armenia 
mayr hayastan statue located near victory park in yerevan armenians have their 
own highly distinctive alphabet and language nine six of the people in the 
country speak armenian while seven five eight of the population speaks russian 
as well the adult literacy rate in armenia is nine nine most adults in yerevan 
can communicate in russian while english is increasing in popularity caucasian 
hospitality is legendary and stems from ancient tradition social gatherings 
focused around sumptuous presentations of course after course of elaborately 
prepared well seasoned but not spicy hot food the host or hostess will often 
put morsels on a guest s plate whenever it is empty or fill his or her glass 
when it gets low after a helping or two it is acceptable to refuse politely or 
more simply just leave a little uneaten food the national art gallery in 
yerevan has more than one six zero zero zero works that date back to the middle 
ages it houses paintings by many european masters the modern art museum the 
children s picture gallery and the martiros saryan museum are only a few of the 
other noteworthy collections of fine art on display in yerevan moreover many 
private galleries are in operation with many more opening each year they 
feature rotating exhibitions and sales the world class armenian philharmonic 
orchestra performs at the beautifully refurbished city opera house where you 
can also attend a full season of opera in addition several chamber ensembles 
are highly regarded for their musicianship including the national chamber 
orchestra of armenia and the serenade orchestra classical music can also be 
heard at one of several smaller venues including the state music conservatory 
and the chamber orchestra hall jazz is popular especially in the summer when 
live performances are a regular occurrence at one of the city s many outdoor 
cafes yerevan s vernisage arts and crafts market close to republic square 
bustles with hundreds of vendors selling a variety of crafts many of superb 
workmanship on weekends and wednesdays though the selection is much reduced mid 
week the market offers woodcarving antiques fine lace and the hand knotted wool 
carpets and kilims that are a caucasus specialty obsidian which is found 
locally is crafted into an amazing assortment of jewelry and ornamental objects 
armenian gold smithery enjoys a long and distinguished tradition populating one 
corner of the market with a selection of gold items soviet relics and souvenirs 
of recent russian manufacture nesting dolls watches enamel boxes and so on are 
also available at the vernisage across from the opera house a popular art 
market fills another city park on the weekends armenia s long history as a 
crossroads of the ancient world has resulted in a landscape with innumerable 
fascinating archaeological sites to explore medieval iron age bronze age and 
even stone age sites are all within a few hours drive from the city all but the 
most spectacular remain virtually undiscovered allowing visitors to view 
churches and fortresses in their original settings the american university of 
armenia has graduate programs in business and law among others the institution 
owes its existence to the combined efforts of the government of armenia the 
armenian general benevolent union usaid and the boalt hall school of law at the 
university of california berkeley the extension programs and the library at aua 
form a new focal point for english language intellectual life in the city many 
of the country s most successful young entrepreneurs are graduates of this 
institution see also artsakh armenian people armenian genocide first republic 
of armenia castles of armenia hayastani azgayin scautakan sharjum 
kazmakerputiun the armenian national scout movement nagorno karabakh public 
holidays in armenia music of armenia armenian needlelace list of armenians 
khachkars intricate armenian knotwork crosses miscellaneous topics 
communications in armenia foreign relations of armenia military of armenia 
transportation in armenia external links and references armeniapedia org the 
armenian wiki with thousands of articles armenianhouse org armenian literature 
and history the heritage foundation publishes the index of economic freedom cia 
the world factbook armenia gov am government of armenia loc gov library of 
congress portal on armenia armeniainfo am armenia information armgate com 
armenian news and pictures of churches and ararat mountain hayastan republika 
pl general information armenian english polish portals hayastan com armenian 
portal with millions of visitors armenian russian english circle am armenian 
web ring armeniasearch com armenian search engine and directory news sites 
panarmenian net armenia armenian news a one plus am fastest news from armenia 
groong org armenian news network groong armenia now edited by john hughes 
caucaz com weekly online publishing articles and reports about armenia and 
south caucasus available in english and french armenia for the region in 
northwest iran see iranian azerbaijan the republic of azerbaijan azerbaijani az 
rbaycan or az rbaycan respublikas is a country in the caucasus at the 
crossroads of europe and southwest asia with a coast on the caspian sea it has 
frontiers with russia in the north georgia in the northwest armenia in the west 
and iran in the south the nakhichevan autonomous republic an exclave of 
azerbaijan borders armenia to the north and east iran to the south and west and 
turkey to the northwest azerbaijan is a secular state and has been a member of 
the council of europe since two zero zero one a majority of the population are 
shi a muslim and of western turkic descent known as azerbaijanis or simply 
azeris the country is formally an emerging democracy however with strong 
authoritarian rule etymology there are several hypotheses regarding the origins 
of the name azerbaijan the most common theory is that it is derived from 
atropatan atropat was the satrap at the time of the persian achaemenid dynasty 
and gained independence after alexander the great destroyed the achaemenids the 
region was known as media atropatia or atropatene at the time there are also 
alternative opinions that the term is a slight turkification of azarbaijan in 
turn an arabicized version of the original persian name zar b dag n made up of 
zar badag n zar fire b dag cultivated area n suffix of pluralization that it 
traditionally means the land of eternal flames or the land of fire which is 
probabely implies zoroastrian fire temples in this land some azeri historians 
contend that the name is made up of four azerbaijani components az er bay can 
which means the land of the brave az people or an elevated place for the 
wealthy and exalted historically a large part of the territory of the present 
day azerbaijan republic has been called arran named after arran a legendary 
founder of caucasian albania however the precise location identified by this 
name has shifted somewhat over time currently referring to the lowland karabakh 
plains situated between the kura and araks rivers some opponents of the name 
azerbaijan assert that it is anachronistic to use it in a historical context 
before one nine one eight because they say the term was first introduced by the 
national intelligentsia in early two zero th century and later was endorsed by 
the bolsheviks with intention of claiming the northern province of persia to 
substantiate this claim they state that until the early two zero th century the 
population of present day azerbaijan had no clear ethnic identification and 
referred to themselves primarily as muslims history main article history of 
azerbaijan the earliest known inhabitants of what is today azerbaijan were the 
caucasian albanians a caucasian speaking people who appear to have been in the 
region prior to the host of peoples who would eventually invade the caucasus 
historically azerbaijan has been occupied by a variety of peoples including 
armenians persians romans arabs turks mongols greek empire and russians the 
first state to emerge in the territory of present day republic of azerbaijan 
was mannae in the nine th century bc lasting until six one six bc when it was 
overthrown by the medes the satrapies of atropatene and caucasian albania were 
established in the four th century bc and included the approximate territories 
of present day azerbaijan and southern parts of dagestan islam spread rapidly 
in azerbaijan following the arab conquests in the seven th eight th centuries 
after the power of the arab khalifate waned several semi independent states 
have been formed the shirvanshah kingdom being one of them in the one one th 
century the conquering seljuk turks became the dominant force in azerbaijan and 
laid the ethnic foundation of contemporary azerbaijanis or azeri turks in the 
one three one four th centuries the country experienced mongol tatar invasions 
azerbaijan was part of the safavid state in one five th one eight th centuries 
it also underwent a brief period of feudal fragmentation in the mid one eight 
th to early one nine th centuries and consisted of independent khanates 
following the two wars between the qajar dynasty of persia and the russian 
empire azerbaijan was acquired by russia through the treaty of gulistan in one 
eight one three and the treaty of turkmenchay in one eight two eight after the 
collapse of the russian empire during world war i azerbaijan declared 
independence and established the azerbaijan democratic republic this first 
muslim republic in the world lasted only two years from one nine one eight to 
one nine two zero before the soviet red army invaded azerbaijan subsequently 
azerbaijan became part of the soviet union azerbaijan re established its 
independence upon the collapse of the soviet union in one nine nine one despite 
a cease fire in place since one nine nine four azerbaijan has yet to resolve 
its conflict with armenia over the predominantly ethnic armenian nagorno 
karabakh region azerbaijan has lost control of one six of its territory 
including karabakh and must support some eight zero zero zero zero zero 
refugees and internally displaced persons as a result of the conflict politics 
main article politics of azerbaijan ilham aliyev president of azerbaijan 
azerbaijan is a presidential republic the head of state and head of government 
are separate from the country s law making body the people elect the president 
for a five year term of office the president appoints all cabinet level 
government administrators a fifty member national assembly makes the country s 
laws the people of azerbaijan elect the national assembly azerbaijan has 
universal suffrage above the age of eighteen after the presidential elections 
of october one five two zero zero three an official release of the central 
election committee cec gave isa gambar leader of the largest opposition bloc 
bizim azerbaycan our azerbaijan one four percent of the electorate and the 
second place in election third with three six came lala shevket hajiyeva leader 
of the national unity movement the first woman to run in presidential election 
in azerbaijan nevertheless the osce the council of europe human rights watch 
and other international organizations as well as local independent political 
and ngos voiced concern about observed vote rigging and a badly flawed counting 
process several independent local and international organizations that had been 
observing and monitoring the election directly or indirectly declared isa 
gambar winner in the one five october election another view shared by many 
international organisations is that in reality a second tour of voting should 
have taken place between the two opposition candidates isa gambar and lala 
shevket human rights watch commented on these elections human rights watch 
research found that the government has heavily intervened in the campaigning 
process in favor of prime minister ilham aliev son of current president heidar 
aliev the government has stacked the central election commission and local 
election commission with its supporters and banned local non governmental 
organizations from monitoring the vote as the elections draw nearer government 
officials have openly sided with the campaign of ilham aliev constantly 
obstructing opposition rallies and attempting to limit public participation in 
opposition events in some cases local officials have closed all the roads into 
town during opposition rallies or have extended working and school hours on one 
occasion even declaring sunday a workday to prevent participation in opposition 
rallies source html format osce s final report source html format or pdf format 
azerbaijan held parliamentary elections on sunday six november two zero zero 
five subdivisions main article subdivisions of azerbaijan azerbaijan is divided 
into five nine raions rayonlar rayon singular one one cities h rl r h r 
singular one autonomous republic muxtar respublika which itself is divided into 
seven raions one city geography map of azerbaijan main article geography of 
azerbaijan azerbaijan has an arid climate except in the southeast temperatures 
vary by season in the southeast lowland temperatures average six c four three f 
in the winter and two six c eight zero f in the summer though daily maxima 
typically reach three two c eight nine f in the northern and western mountain 
ranges temperatures average one two c five five f in the summer and nine c two 
zero f in the winter annual rainfall over most of the country varies from two 
zero zero to four zero zero millimetres eight to one six in and is generally 
lowest in the northeast in the far southeast however the climate is much 
moister and annual rainfall can be as high as one three zero zero millimetres 
five one in for most of the country the wettest periods are in spring and 
autumn with summers being the driest economy main article economy of azerbaijan 
the economy is largely based on industry industries include machine manufacture 
petroleum and other mining petroleum refining textile production and chemical 
processing agriculture accounts for one third of azerbaijan s economy most of 
the nation s farms are irrigated in the lowlands farmers grow such crops as 
cotton fruit grain tea tobacco and many types of vegetables silkworms are 
raised for the production of natural silk for the clothing industry azerbaijan 
s herders raise cattle domestic sheep and goats near the mountain ranges 
seafood and fish are caught in the nearby caspian sea azerbaijan has a highly 
dynamic economy mainly because of oil and has a gdp growth rate of up to one 
one a year demographics main article demographics of azerbaijan azerbaijan has 
population of roughly seven nine one one nine seven four july two zero zero 
five est nine zero six of whom are ethnic azerbaijani also called azeris one 
nine nine nine census figures azeris also form about two four of the population 
of iran predominating in the northern regions of the country most of armenia s 
azeri minority have left since independence and the nagorno karabakh war the 
second largest ethnic group are russians who now form roughly one eight of the 
population most having emigrated since independence the talysh an iranian 
people predominate in the southernmost regions of the country around the talysh 
mountains and across the border into iran some people argue that the number of 
talysh is greater than officially recorded as many of them are counted as 
azerbaijanis numerous dagestani peoples live around the border with dagestan 
the main peoples are the lezgis avar and the tsakhur smaller groups include the 
budukh udi kryts and khinalug ketsh around the village of xinaliq around the 
town of quba in the north live the tats also known as the mountain jews who are 
also to be found in dagestan many tats have emigrated to israel in recent years 
though this trend has slowed and even reversed more recently the country s 
large armenian population mostly fled to armenia and to other countries with 
the beginning of the armenian azeri conflict over nagorno karabakh during the 
same period azerbaijan also received a large influx of azerbaijanis fleeing 
armenia and later nagorno karabakh and adjacent provinces occupied by the 
armenians almost all of azerbaijan s armenians now live in nagorno karabakh 
azerbaijan also contains numerous smaller groups such as kurds georgians tatars 
and ukrainians most azerbaijanis about six zero seven zero are twelver shia 
muslim other religions or beliefs that are followed by many in the country are 
the orthodox sunni islam the armenian apostolic church in karabakh the russian 
orthodox church and various other christian and muslim sects the tat in quba as 
well as several thousand ashkenazim jews in baku follow judaism adherence to 
religious dogmas is nominal for the majority of the population and attitudes 
are secular traditionally villages around baku and the lenkoran region are 
considered stronghold of shi ism and in some northern regions populated by 
sunni dagestani people the salafi sect has gained a following folk islam is 
widely practiced but an organized sufi movement is absent culture main article 
culture of azerbaijan the official language of azerbaijan is azerbaijani a 
member of the oguz subdivision of the turkic language family and is spoken by 
around nine five of the republic s population as well as about a third of the 
population of iran its closest relatives in language are turkish and turkmen as 
a result of the language policy of the soviet union russian is also commonly 
spoken as a second language among the urbane there are also speakers of persian 
and kurdish in the state azerbaijan s culture has long cultural roots with iran 
and iranian peoples music of azerbaijan islam in azerbaijan azerbaijani 
literature miscellaneous topics communications in azerbaijan transportation in 
azerbaijan military of azerbaijan foreign relations of azerbaijan public 
holidays in azerbaijan list of azerbaijanis scout association of azerbaijan 
nagorno karabakh references forrest brett nov two eight two zero zero five over 
a barrel in baku fortune pp five four six zero external links cia world 
factbook azerbaijan bbc country profile azerbaijan open directory project 
azerbaijan directory category library of congress portals to the world 
azerbaijan directory category azerbaijan from a to z azerbaijan international 
world s largest website about azerbaijan encyclopedia of nations azerbaijan 
democratic youth movement new idea virtual azerbaijan republic caucaz com 
weekly online magazine publishing articles and reports about azerbaijan and 
south caucasus available in english and french baku today independent newspaper 
azadliq state statistical committee of the azerbaijan republic united nations 
office in azerbaijan with a country report ifex press freedom in azerbaijan 
azerbaijan amateur astronomy often called back yard astronomy in the us is a 
hobby whose participants enjoy observing celestial objects it is usually 
associated with viewing the night sky when most celestial objects and events 
are visible but sometimes amateur astronomers also operate during the day for 
events such as sunspots and solar eclipses amateur astronomers often look at 
the sky using nothing more than their eyes but common tools for amateur 
astronomy include portable telescopes and binoculars aurora australis display 
over wellington nz november two zero zero one published by nasa spaceweather 
com comet neat over wellington nz two zero zero three amateur astronomy and 
scientific research unlike professional astronomy scientific research is not 
always the main goal for many amateur astronomers work of scientific merit is 
certainly possible however and many amateurs contribute to the knowledge base 
of professional astronomers very successfully astronomy is often promoted as 
one of the few remaining sciences for which amateurs can still contribute 
useful data the majority of scientific contributions by amateur astronomers are 
in the area of data collection in particular this applies where large numbers 
of amateur astronomers with small telescopes are more effective than the 
relatively small number of large telescopes that are available to professional 
astronomers several organisations such as the center for backyard astrophysics 
exist to help coordinate these contributions in particular amateur astronomers 
often contribute toward activities such as monitoring the changes in brightness 
of variable stars helping to track asteroids and observing occultations to 
determine both the shape of asteroids and the shape of the terrain on the 
apparent edge of the moon as seen from earth in the past and present amateur 
astronomers have also played a major role in discovering new comets recently 
however funding of projects such as the lincoln near earth asteroid research 
and near earth asteroid tracking projects has meant that most comets are now 
discovered by automated systems long before it is possible for amateurs to see 
them a newer role for amateurs is searching for overlooked phenomena e g kreutz 
sungrazers in the vast libraries of digital images and other data captured by 
earth and space based observatories much of which is available over the 
internet societies for amateur astronomy there are a large number of amateur 
astronomical societies around the world that serve as a meeting point for those 
interested in amateur astronomy whether they be people who are actively 
interested in observing or armchair astronomers who may be simply interested in 
the topic societies range widely in their goals depending on a variety of 
factors such as geographic spread local circumstances size and membership for 
instance a local society in the middle of a large city may have regular 
meetings with speakers focusing less on observing the night sky if the 
membership is less able to observe due to factors such as light pollution it is 
common for local societies to hold regular meetings which may include 
activities such as star parties other activities could include amateur 
telescope making which was pioneered in america by russell w porter who later 
played a major role in design and construction of the hale telescope approaches 
to using amateur telescopes amateur telescopes come in many shapes and sizes 
both commercial and home built the preferences of people who use them often 
differ star hopping some amateur astronomers prefer to learn the sky as 
accurately as they can using maps to find their way between the stars in this 
case a common approach is to use binoculars or a manually driven telescope 
combined with star maps to locate items of interest in the sky the normal 
technique for doing this by locating landmark stars and hopping between them is 
called star hopping goto telescopes more recently as technology has improved 
and prices have come down automated goto telescopes have also become a popular 
choice with these computer driven telescopes the user typically enters the name 
of the item they wish to look at and the telescope finds it in the sky 
automatically with comparatively little further effort required by the user the 
main advantage of a goto telescope for an experienced amateur astronomer is the 
reduction of wasted time that may have otherwise been used in trying to find a 
particular object this time can therefore be used more effectively for studying 
the object comparing methodologies there is significant though usually light 
hearted debate within the hobby about which method is better promoters of the 
star hopping approach for finding items in the sky usually argue that they know 
the sky much better as a result the manual method also tends to require simpler 
equipment with less calibration and setup time and is therefore more versatile 
promoters of goto telescopes often argue that they are more interested in 
studying objects and the reward of finding them or learning exactly where they 
are is not as important to them it may also be argued that the money spent on 
complex electronics and mounting systems might be better spent on higher 
quality optics additional tools and activities in addition to optical equipment 
amateur astronomers use a variety of other tools such as celestial maps and 
specialised computer software there is a range of astronomy software available 
from planetarium programs that simulate the sky to programs used to do various 
kinds of calculations pertaining to astronomical phenomena most amateur 
astronomers also keep a record of their observations this can take the form of 
an observing log in which they record details about which objects were observed 
and describing the details that were seen astrophotography and sketching are 
also popularly used to record observations beginning in amateur astronomy there 
are a many ways for people to become involved in amateur astronomy and study 
the night sky one option is to join a local astronomical society the members of 
which will often be very happy to help a newcomer take a more active part some 
people also prefer to simply teach themselves in which case there are likely to 
be a large amount of books in the local library common objects that are 
observed early are the moon and planets another thing that most newcomers to 
amateur astronomy become acquainted with are the more prominent constellations 
in the night sky when reading maps and interpreting instructions for future 
star hopping constellations are good starting points for identifying locations 
in the night sky they are frequently referred to by amateur astronomers when 
discussing the location of items of interest when looked at with binoculars and 
telescopes beginning with a goto telescope a relatively new type of beginning 
amateur astronomer brought about by the increased affordability of powerful 
goto telescopes is one who begins with such a telescope it is possible for an 
inexperienced person to immediately look at a large amount of deep sky objects 
in the night sky without necessarily having any prior experience or training 
there is currently some debate among amateur astronomers about the merits of 
this approach to becoming involved in the hobby and the effects that low priced 
goto telescopes may be having amateur astronomy is exposed to more people as an 
individual is less likely to be discouraged by the need to learn how to locate 
objects in the night sky before being able to see them some are concerned 
however that newcomers may become bored very quickly a goto telescope does not 
distinguish between objects that are easy and hard to see and newcomers may 
therefore begin with objects that require large amounts of experience or 
understanding to properly appreciate becoming acquainted with the night sky 
most tutors agree that it is very important to know one s way around the sky by 
means of the constellations this ability forms a platform from which deeper 
explorations of the sky are then possible a planisphere can be used to find and 
identify the constellations these devises show the location of the 
constellations for any time of the night or time of the year an observer will 
also need a red flashlight to read star charts or the planisphere use of a red 
light helps preserve the dark adaptation of the eyes having learned the main 
constellations a beginner may want to extend their hobby and buy a pair of 
binoculars or a telescope using binoculars with binoculars it is possible to 
see many deep sky objects dsos holding the binoculars can produce a shaky image 
one way to improve the view is with the aid of a sturdy tripod mount to steady 
the view through the binoculars binoculars are still limited in range although 
most of the messier catalogue should be visible as well as a great many ngc s 
especially near the milky way an advantage of binoculars is that they allow 
more complete wide field views of the larger open clusters such as the pleiades 
the hyades the coma berenices cluster and praesepe for example of which only 
portions are usually observable in one field of view at higher magnifications 
using a telescope with a telescope the sky really comes alive especially one 
that has an aperture of six inches or more some amateur telescopes are built by 
their owners from scratch but many good quality telescopes can be purchased 
from reputable companies thousands of dsos are visible in a telescope and the 
determined amateur with a large about four one cm telescope can push this to 
tens of thousands or more another type of telescope to consider especially if 
the amateur is observing with children is a wide field telescope such as edmund 
scientific s f four astroscan compact reflector this type of telescope is 
typically a short tube reflector and has an aperture of only eight zero to one 
two zero mm three one four to four three four inches but is easier to target an 
object since it offers a much wider field of view with the aid of high power 
lenses i e eyepieces the amateur can zoom in on planets and some of the closer 
dsos it is the best of a blend of a telescope s narrow long range light 
gathering ability with a binocular s wider field of view those who are 
particularly interested in observing the moon and planets may prefer a high 
power design such as the maksutov telescope with any telescope though the mount 
is the most important feature a tripod that doesn t shake every time one uses 
it is a must too many amateur astronomers give up because they have a hard time 
targeting an object if the mounting tripod is rock solid the amateur can enjoy 
their time observing the heavens instead of fighting with the telescope 
astrophotography a photo taken of comet hale bopp using a standard three five 
mm camera with a five zero mm lens and four zero zero iso film the exposure was 
taken for one zero seconds on a tripod using a shutter cable release the next 
step in an amateur astronomer s quest for more space adventure could be the 
purchase of a good camera for astrophotography starting out with a good three 
five mm camera with a five zero mm lens mounted on a tripod and using a cable 
release and four zero zero or faster speed film the amateur can capture some 
nice pictures of the planets and some larger nebula like the orion nebula some 
of the larger comets and prolific meteor showers can be photographed this way 
as well as one progresses cameras can be mounted directly on to telescopes 
capturing on film many dsos special films and even the technique of hypering 
the film has been employed by the amateur many publications accept these 
astrophotos in their magazines i e astronomy and sky telescope a more recent 
development is the use of webcams to do speckle imaging also known as video 
astronomy the resulting short exposure frames can be stacked using the shift 
and add method of speckle imaging or selected to do lucky imaging all using 
commercially available astronomy software sketching as an alternative to 
photography in order to make a record of observations amateurs also use 
sketching sketching does not require the use of any specialized equipment and 
is therefore suitable for beginners as well as advanced amateur observers there 
are different approaches to sketching that require different tools simple 
pencil sketches can sometimes be used to make accurate renditions of what the 
observer sees through binoculars or a telescope as the expewrience of the 
observer increases more advanced drawing tools and techniques can be employed 
sketching has the advantage of helping the observer scrutinize the object that 
is seen and can help bring out details that otherwise might have been 
overlooked suggested reading some good books for amateur astronomers to start 
with are the stars a new way to see them by hans augusto rey isbn zero three 
nine five zero eight one two one one nightwatch an equinox guide to viewing the 
universe by terence dickinson isbn zero nine two zero six five six eight nine 
seven the backyard astronomer s guide by terence dickinson and alan dyer isbn 
zero nine two one eight two zero one one nine turn left at orion by guy 
consolmagno isbn zero five two one three four zero nine zero x skywatching by 
david h levy and john o byrne isbn zero seven zero seven eight three five four 
seven five one x seeing in the dark how backyard stargazers are probing deep 
space and guarding earth from interplanetary peril by timothy ferris isbn zero 
six eight four eight six five seven nine three the complete manual of amateur 
astronomy by p clay sherrod burnham s celestial handbook an observer s guide to 
the universe beyond the solar system three vols by robert burnham jr vol one 
isbn zero four eight six two three five six seven x vol two isbn zero four 
eight six two three five six eight eight vol three isbn zero four eight six two 
three six seven three zero see also amateur telescope making astronomical 
object astronomy observation observational astronomy skygazing external links 
night sky gazing information for newcomers to the hobby astronomical league 
society for popular astronomy the uk s biggest society for amateur astronomers 
astroscopic labs amateur astrophotography reviews and articles amateur 
astronomy aikido aikid also using an older style of kanji literally meaning 
joining energy way is a gendai budo a modern japanese martial art practitioners 
of aikido are known as aikidoka it was developed by morihei ueshiba also known 
by aikidoka as o sensei over the period of the one nine three zero s to the one 
nine six zero s technically the major parts of aikido are derived from dait ry 
aiki j jutsu a form of jujutsu with many joint techniques and kenjutsu or 
japanese sword technique some believe the tactics in aikido are especially 
influenced by yagy shinkage ry aikido is also considered to contain a 
significant spiritual component history the name aikido is formed of three 
japanese characters usually romanised as ai ki and do these are often 
translated as meaning union universal energy and way so aikido can be 
translated as the way to union with universal energy another common 
interpretation of the characters is harmony spirit and way so aikido can also 
mean the way of spiritual harmony both interpretations draw attention to the 
fact that aikido s techniques are designed to control an attacker by 
controlling and redirecting their energy instead of blocking it an analogy is 
often made of the way a flexible willow bends with the storm whereas the stout 
oak will break if the wind blows too hard the korean martial art commonly known 
as hapkido uses the same three characters some suggest a historical link 
through daito ryu the main origin of aikido morihei ueshiba developed aikido 
mainly from daito ryu aikijutsu incorporating training movements such as those 
for the yari spear jo a short quarterstaff and perhaps also juken bayonet but 
arguably the strongest influence is that of the katana sword in many ways an 
aikido practitioner moves as an empty handed swordsman the aikido strikes 
shomenuchi and yokomenuchi originated from weapon attacks and resultant 
techniques likewise from weapon take aways some schools of aikido do no weapons 
training at all others such as iwama ryu usually spend substantial time with 
bokken bokuto wooden sword jo and tanto knife in some lines of aikido all 
techniques can be performed with a sword as well as unarmed aikido was first 
brought to the west in one nine five one by minoru mochizuki with a visit to 
france it was introduced to the united states in one nine five three by kenji 
tomiki and a little later in the same year by koichi tohei the united kingdom 
followed in one nine five five germany and australia in one nine six five today 
there are many aikido dojos available to train at throughout the world 
technique aikido incorporates a wide range of techniques which use principles 
of energy and motion to redirect neutralise and control attackers one of the 
central martial philosophies of aikido is to be able to handle multiple 
attacker circumstances fluidly randori practice against multiple opponents is a 
key part of the curriculum in most aikido schools and is required for the 
higher level belts another tenet of aikido is that the aikidoka should gain 
control of their opponent as quickly as possible while causing the least amount 
of damage possible to either party if performed correctly size and strength are 
not important for the techniques to be effective training the methods of 
training vary from organisation to organisation and indeed even between 
different dojo in a single organisation typically however a class consists of a 
teacher demonstrating techniques or principles which the students then practice 
training is done through mutual technique where the focus is on entering and 
blending harmonising with the attack rather than on meeting force with force 
uke the receiver of the technique usually initiates an attack against nage also 
referred to as tori or shite depending on aikido style who neutralises it with 
an aikido technique the uke and the nage have equally important roles uke s 
role is to be honest and committed in attack to use positioning to protect 
oneself and to learn proper technique through the imbalanced feeling created by 
nage s technique nage s role is to blend with and neutralise uke s attack 
without leaving an opening to further attacks simultaneously nage will be 
studying how to create a feeling of being centred on balance and controlled in 
the application of the aikido technique therefore students must practise both 
positions in order to learn proper technique when o sensei taught all his 
students were uke until he deemed them knowledgeable enough of the technique to 
be nage movement awareness precision distance and timing are all important to 
the execution of techniques as students progress from rigidly defined exercises 
to more fluid and adaptable applications eventually students take part in jiyu 
waza free attack and or randori where the attacks are less predictable most 
schools employ training methods wherein uke actively attempts to employ counter 
techniques or kaeshi waza o sensei did not allow competition in training 
because some techniques were considered too dangerous and because he believed 
that competition did not develop good character in students most styles of 
aikido continue this tradition although shodokan aikido see styles started with 
competitions early on in the ki society there are forms taigi competitions held 
from time to time defense aikido techniques are largely designed towards 
keeping the attacker off balance and locking joints much of aikido s repertoire 
of defenses can be performed either as throwing techniques nage waza or as pins 
katame waza depending on the situation entering irimi and turning tenkan are 
widely used aikido concepts as is striking atemi the use of striking techniques 
is dependent on the organization and to some extent the individual dojo some 
dojo teach the strikes that are integral to all aikido techniques as mere 
distractions used to make the application of an aikido technique easier while 
others teach that strikes are to be used for more destructive reasons o sensei 
himself wrote while describing the aikido technique ikkyo first smash the eyes 
this might well refer to the fact that the classic opener for ikkyo is a knife 
hand thrust towards the face to make uke block and thus expose his or her arm 
to the joint control thus as though moving to smash uke s eyes manipulation of 
uke s balance by entering is often referred to as taking uke s center it is 
sometimes said that aikido contains only defense and the attacks that are 
performed are not really aikido from a historical perspective this claim is 
questionable but many if not most aikidoka have the defense techniques as the 
focus of their training attacks in the early days when ueshiba began teaching 
to the public students tended to be proficient in another martial art due to 
this attacks per se are generally not focused on in contemporary aikido dojos 
students will learn the various attacks from which an aikido technique can be 
practiced although attacks seldom are studied to the same extent as some arts 
good attacks are needed to study correct and effective application of technique 
honest attacks are considered important an honest attack would be an attack 
with full intention or a strong neutral neither pulling or pushing grab or hold 
the speed of an attack may vary depending on the experience and level of the 
nage the partner who executes the throw or technique whether the attack is fast 
or slow the uke s intention to strike or control if grabbing or pinning should 
remain in order to provide the nage a realistic training scenario aikido 
attacks used in normal training include various stylized strikes and grabs such 
as shomenuchi a vertical strike to the head yokomenuchi a lateral strike to the 
side of the head and or neck munetsuki a straight punch ryotedori a two handed 
grab or katadori a shoulder grab many of the uchi strikes resemble blows from a 
sword or other weapon kicks are sometimes used but are not usually part of 
basic curricula most aikido techniques can also be applied to a response to an 
attack e g to a block and some schools use this as the basic form of a given 
class of technique beginners also tend to work with techniques executed in 
response to a grab grabs are considered good for basic practice because the 
connection with uke is very clear and strong and it is easier to feel out body 
mechanics and lines of force there is also the matter of atemi or strikes 
employed during an aikido technique the role and importance of atemi is a 
matter of some debate in aikido some view atemi as strikes to vital points that 
can be delivered during the course of a technique s application to increase 
effectiveness others consider atemi to be methods of distraction particularly 
when aimed at the face for instance if a movement would expose the aikido 
practitioner to a counter blow he or she may deliver a quick strike to distract 
the attacker or occupy the threatening limb such a strike will also usually 
break the target s concentration making them easier to throw than if they are 
able to focus on resisting atemi can be interpreted as not only punches or 
kicks but also for instance striking with a shoulder or a large part of the arm 
some throws are arguably effected through an unbalancing or abrupt application 
of atemi many sayings about atemi are attributed to morihei ueshiba although 
their precise content varies considerably based on the one doing the telling 
weapons weapons training in aikido usually consists of jo four foot staff 
bokken wooden sword and wooden or sometimes rubber tanto knife both weapons 
taking and weapons retention are sometimes taught to integrate the armed and 
unarmed aspects of aikido for example a technique done with a straight punch 
may be done with a tanto or jo thrust instead or a grab technique may be 
illustrated as a way to draw strike with a weapon while being grabbed many 
schools use versions of morihiro saito s weapons system aiki jo and aiki ken 
the system contains solo kata with jo and paired exercises for both jo and 
bokken some lineages use bokken kata derived from older sword schools also 
quite a few aikido teachers such as mitsugi saotome and kazuo chiba have 
developed their own weapons systems this is largely due to the fact that o 
sensei did not teach weapons to his students excepting a few clothing the 
aikidogi used in aikido is similar to the keikogi used in most other modern 
budo arts simple trousers and a wraparound jacket usually white in some places 
a keikogi of karate cut is preferred in others most people use judo keikogis 
keikogi made specially for aikido exist but usually not in the lower price 
ranges many dojos insist that the sleeves are cut short to elbow length to 
reduce the risk of trapped fingers and injuries in grab techniques to the wrist 
to the keikogi adds the traditional garment hakama wide pleated trousers the 
hakama is usually black or dark blue and in most dojos the hakama is reserved 
for practitioners with dan black belt ranks systems also exist where hakama is 
never worn or are worn from a specific kyu rank others exist where women are 
allowed to wear it earlier than men the belt obi is wrapped twice around the 
body similar to in karate or judo although some systems use many belt colours 
similar to the system in judo the most common version is that dan ranks wear 
black belt and kyu ranks white sometimes with an additional brown belt for the 
highest kyu ranks in some dojos it is common to have the same color belt at 
different levels spirituality the ending do in the word aikido indicates a 
spiritual path unlike the ending jutsu in the word aikijujutsu which indicates 
a system of techniques many people see this difference as important as well as 
regarding iaijutsu and iaido jujutsu and judo and kenjutsu and kendo others see 
this distinction as a historically incorrect and somewhat unnatural division 
for example literally do refers to a path and jitsu to a technique therefore 
some argue aikido involves both a way do and technical study jutsu ueshiba 
taught that while it was important to become proficient in physical technique 
this is not the ultimate purpose of training he taught that the principles 
learned through training in physical technique are universal and are to be 
applied to all aspects of one s life he once commented that he was teaching 
students not how to move their feet but rather how to move their minds many 
agree that ueshiba s style became softer more fluid and effortless as he grew 
older some suggest this was due to a shift in focus to the spiritual aspects of 
the art while others suggest that this was simply a natural result of ueshiba 
becoming more proficient in physical technique various interpretations have 
arisen since ueshiba s death a range of aikido schools can be found each 
placing a different emphasis on physical techniques underlying principles and 
spiritual concepts this is largely a result of at what point the founder of 
each of these schools trained with ueshiba earlier or later in ueshiba s life 
the former tend to focus more on physical technique while the latter tend to 
focus more on spiritual concepts however this should not be overstated 
especially since there is considerable variance from sensei to sensei and an 
aikido continuum is quite problematic to actually construct some aikidoka view 
physical vs spiritual as a false separation or a failed attempt to stereotype 
branches of aikido ki society is an example of a school that focuses heavily on 
the spiritual concepts of aikido rather than physical technique ki obsolete 
form of the ki kanji the japanese character for ki is a symbolic representation 
of a lid covering a pot full of rice the steam being contained within is ki 
this same word is applied to the ability to harness one s own breath power 
power or energy this ki is the same as the qi in qi gong but many people argue 
it is not the same as the chi in t ai chi when aikidoka say that someone is 
training with a lot of ki they usually want to express that the person is very 
non forcefully compelling in the execution of his technique timing a sense for 
the correct distance and a centered undisturbed mind and body are particularly 
important most teachers claim to locate ki in the hara which might be loosely 
defined as the body s center of gravity situated in the lower abdomen about two 
inches below and behind the navel in training it is constantly emphasized that 
one should keep one s hara that is remain centered very high ranking teachers 
sometimes reach a level of coordination that enables them to execute techniques 
with very little apparent movement sometimes even without seeming to touch 
their opponent s body essentially ki corresponds to the physical concepts of 
center of gravity center of momentum and center of force however these centers 
are not necessarily the same so ki also encompasses the biological and mental 
aspect of training oneself to have exquisite control over motion the spiritual 
interpretation of ki depends very much on what school of aikido one studies as 
some emphasize it more than others ki society dojos for example tend to spend 
much more time on ki related training activities than do for example yoshinkan 
dojos the importance of ki in aikido cannot be denied the name of the martial 
art after all can be translated as the meeting of ki but what ki is is debated 
by many within the discipline o sensei himself appears to have changed his 
views over time for example yoshinkan aikido which largely follows o sensei s 
teachings from before the war is considerably more martial in nature reflecting 
a younger more violent and less spiritual o sensei within this school ki 
perhaps could be better thought of as having its original chinese meaning of 
breath and aikido as coordination of movement with breath to maximize power as 
o sensei evolved and his views changed his teachings took on a much more 
ethereal feel and many of his later students almost all now high ranking 
senseis within the aikikai teach about ki from this perspective see also qi 
qigong body aikido training is for all around physical fitness flexibility and 
relaxation the human body in general can exert power in two ways contractive 
and expansive aikidofaq com many fitness activities for example weight lifting 
emphasize the former which means that specific muscles or muscle groups are 
isolated and worked to improve tone mass and power the disadvantage of this 
however is that whole body movement and coordination are rarely stressed thus 
while muscle size and power may increase there is no emphasis on the ways in 
which those muscles can work together most efficiently also this sort of 
training tends to increase tension decrease flexibility and stress the joints 
the result may be aesthetically pleasing but when done to excess may actually 
be detrimental to overall health the second type of power expansive is mostly 
stressed in activities such as dance or gymnastics in these activities the body 
must learn to move in a coordinated manner and with relaxation aikido also 
mostly stresses this sort of training while both types of power are important 
it is interesting to note that a person who masters the second type of power 
can in a martial context often overcome a person who is much bigger or stronger 
the reason for this is that the contractive power is only as great as the mass 
and power of your individual muscles expansive power however as used in aikido 
can be much greater than your size may lead you to believe this is because you 
move with your whole body rather than stressing and tensing only a few muscles 
you learn to relax and move from the center of your body where you are most 
powerful power is then extended out naturally through the relaxed limbs which 
become almost whip like in their motion needless to say the power behind an 
entire person s body will be more than that of someone s arm or leg alone hence 
aikido develops the body in a unique manner aerobic fitness is obtained through 
vigorous training flexibility of the joints and connective tissues is developed 
through various stretching exercises and through the techniques themselves 
relaxation is learned automatically since without it the techniques will not 
function a balanced use of contractive and expansive power is mastered enabling 
even a small person to pit his entire body s energy against their opponent with 
this different masters stress different aspects of training some masters stress 
importance of body posture while executing the technique in order to coordinate 
different parts of the body while others deal with the physical aspects of it 
with each way comes a different means of interpretation of the same basic 
principles of the art which is discussed in more detail above mind aikido 
training does not consider the body and mind as independent entities the 
condition of one affects the other for example the physical relaxation learned 
in aikido also becomes a mental relaxation likewise the confidence that 
develops mentally is manifested in a more confident style psychological or 
spiritual insight learned during training must become reflected in the body 
else it will vanish under pressure when more basic ingrained patterns and 
reflexes take over aikido training requires the student to squarely face 
conflict not to run away from it through this experience an aikido student may 
learn to face other areas of life in a similarly proactive fashion rather than 
in with avoidance and fear styles the major styles of aikido each have their 
own hombu dojo in japan have an international breadth and were founded by 
direct students of morihei ueshiba although there has been an explosion of 
independent styles generally only the first five listed have been considered 
major iwama ryu is a debatable sixth as although its influence is major it has 
until recently been part of the aikikai see below aikikai is the largest aikido 
organisation and is led by the family of the founder numerous sub organisations 
and teachers affiliate themselves with this umbrella organisation which 
therefore encompasses a wide variety of aikido styles training methods and 
technical differences these sub organisations are often centred around 
prominant shihan and are usually organised at the national level although sub 
national and inter national sub organisations exist please see list of famous 
aikidoka for more detail yoshinkan founded by gozo shioda has a reputation for 
being the most rigidly precise students of yoshinkan aikido practise basic 
movements as solo kata and this style has been popular among the japanese 
police the international organization associated with the yoshinkan style of 
aikido is known as the yoshinkai and has active branches in many parts of the 
world yoseikan was founded by minoru mochizuki who was an early student of o 
sensei and also of jigoro kano at the kodokan this style includes elements of 
aiki budo together with aspects of karate judo and other arts it is now carried 
on by his son hiroo mochizuki the creator of yoseikan budo shodokan aikido 
often called tomiki aikido after its founder use sparring and rule based 
competition in training as opposed to most others people tend to compete to 
train rather than to train to compete kenji tomiki an early student of o sensei 
and also of judo s jigoro kano believed that introducing an element of 
competition would serve to sharpen and focus the practice since it was no 
longer tested in real combat this latter view was the cause of a split with o 
sensei s family who firmly believed that there was no place for competition in 
aikido training tomiki said that at no point did o sensei actually cast him out 
the ki society founded by former head instructor of the hombu dojo one zero th 
dan koichi tohei emphasizes very soft flowing techniques and has a special 
program for the development of ki it also has a special system of ki ranks 
alongside the traditional kyu and dan system this style is called shin shin 
toitsu aikido or ki aikido iwama ryu emphasizes the relation between weapon 
techniques and barehand techniques and a great deal of emphasis is placed on 
weapons training since the death of its founder morihiro saito the iwama style 
has been practiced by clubs within the aikikai and an independent organization 
headed by hitohiro saito saito sensei was a long time uchideshi of o sensei 
beginning in one nine four six and staying with him through his death many 
consider that saito sensei was the student who spent most time directly 
studying with o sensei saito sensei said he was trying to preserve and teach 
the art exactly as the founder of aikido taught it to him technically iwama ryu 
seems to resemble the aikido o sensei was teaching in the early five zero s 
mainly in the iwama dojo the technical repertoire is fairly large the new 
separate from aikikai iwama ryu aikido has been renamed iwama shin shin 
aikishurenkai shin ei taido founded by the late noriaki inoue nephew of morihei 
ueshiba yoshokai aikido begun by then hachidan takashi kushida of yoshinkan 
aikido is a remarkably centralized style of aikido with test techniques yearly 
passed down with explanations from the home dojo the syllabus contains a 
considerable amount of weapons study and like yoshinkan yoshokai includes many 
solo movements and exercises doshinkan aikido begun by yukio utada of yoshinkan 
aikido utada was a student of both the yoshinkan founder gozo shioda and 
yoshokai founder takashi kushida like yoshokai the syllabus also contains a 
considerable amount of weapons study and like yoshinkan doshinkan includes many 
solo movements and exercises doshinkan aikido aikido association of north 
america and doshinkan aikido international is still affiliated with the 
international yoshinkan aikido federation tendoryu aikido headed by kenji 
shimizu shin budo kai headed by shizuo imaizumi kokikai aikido founded by shuji 
maruyama in one nine eight six focuses on minimalist but effective technique it 
emphasizes natural stances and ukemi that do not require high breakfalls and 
deemphasizes atemi and techniques that cause pain or undue discomfort to uke as 
such it is considered by some to be a soft style of aikido seidokan aikido 
founded by rod kobayashi tends to utilize movements which are very small and 
economical encourages students to discover an aikido which is truly their own 
stresses the importance of doing away with the extraneous and focusing on that 
which works nippon kan headed by gaku homma nishio aikido a part of the aikikai 
although techically well defined according to its head shoji nishio nishio 
sensei passed away in march two zero zero five nihon goshin aikido headed by 
richard bowe it is considered a hard style of aikido combining techniques from 
karate judo and daito ryu aikijutsu there are roughly a dozen dojos in the 
united states and none left in japan founded by shoto morita in japan circa one 
nine five zero derivative styles include nihon goshin aikijutsu founded by 
walter kopitov in two zero zero zero for more information see the black belt 
master course in nihon goshin aikido takemusu aiki tomita academy academy for 
the development of takemusu aiki founded in one nine nine two by takeji tomita 
this training method incorporates tai jutsu aiki ken and aiki jo for the study 
of the inter related principles of takemusu aiki and japanese budo aiki 
manseido headed by kanshu sunadomari independent style centred in kyushu japan 
aikidoka it is sometimes said that in japan the term aikidoka mainly refers to 
a professional while in the west any one who practices may call themselves an 
aikidoka the term aikidoist is also used as a more general term especially by 
those who prefer to maintain the more restricted japanese meaning of the term 
aikidoka see list of famous aikidoka external links aikiweb aikido information 
is a comprehensive site on aikido with essays forums images reviews columns 
wiki and other information chief among its notable content is its aikido dojo 
search engine the aikido faq a large but loose collection of essays multimedia 
and humour aikido journal website the most comprehensive source of aikido 
historical information aikido japanese martial arts winged victory of 
samothrace exihibited in the louvre by its original and broadest definition art 
from the latin ars meaning skill or craft is the product or process of the 
effective application of a body of knowledge and a set of skills this meaning 
is preserved in such phrases as liberal arts and martial arts however in the 
modern use of the word which rose to prominence during the renaissance art is 
commonly understood to be the process or result of making material works or 
artwork which from concept to creation adhere to the creative impulse that is 
art is distinguished from other works by being in large part unprompted by 
necessity by biological drive or by any undisciplined pursuit of recreation by 
both definitions of the word artistic works have existed for almost as long as 
humankind from early pre historic art to contemporary art the creative arts are 
a collection of disciplines whose principal purpose is in the output of 
material that is compelled by a personal drive and echoes or reflects a message 
mood and symbolism for the viewer to interpret as such the term art may be 
taken to include forms as diverse as prose writing poetry dance acting music 
sculpture and painting in addition to serving as a method of pure creativity 
and self expression the purpose of works of art may be to communicate ideas 
such as in politically religiously and philosophically motivated art to create 
a sense of beauty see aesthetics and fine art or pleasure or to generate strong 
emotions the purpose may also be seemingly nonexistent as a form of cultural 
expression art may be defined by the pursuit of diversity and the usage of 
narratives of liberation and exploration i e art history art criticism and art 
theory to mediate its boundaries this distinction may be applied to objects or 
performances current or historical and its prestige extends to those who made 
found exhibit or own them other than originality there are no widely agreed 
upon criteria for what is or isn t considered art and there are many divergent 
definitions of art to seek more specific requirements etymology the word art 
derives from the latin ars which roughly translates to skill or craft and 
derives in turn from an indo european root meaning arrangement or to arrange 
this is the only near universal definition of art that whatever is described as 
such has undergone a deliberate process of arrangement by an agent a few 
examples where this meaning proves very broad include artifact artificial 
artifice artillery medical arts and military arts however there are many other 
colloquial uses of the word all with some relation to its etymological roots 
art forms there are a variety of arts including visual arts and design 
decorative arts plastic arts and the performing arts artistic expression takes 
many forms painting drawing printmaking sculpture music literature and 
architecture are the most widely recognised forms however since the advent of 
modernism and the technological revolution new forms have emerged these include 
photography film video art installation art conceptual art performance art 
community arts land art fashion comics computer art anime and most recently 
video games within each form a wide range of genres may exist for instance a 
painting may be a still life a portrait or a landscape and may deal with 
historical or domestic subjects in addition a work of art may be 
representational or abstract most forms of art fit under two main categories 
fine arts and applied arts though there is no clear dividing line in the visual 
arts the term fine arts most often refers to painting and sculpture arts which 
have little or no practical function and are valued in terms of the visual 
pleasure they provide or their success in communicating ideas or feelings other 
visual arts typically designated as fine arts include printmaking drawing 
photography film and video though the tools used to realize these media are 
often used to make applied or commercial art as well architecture typically 
confounds the distinctions between fine and applied art since the form involves 
designing structures that strive to be both attractive and functional the term 
applied arts is most often used to describe the design or decoration of 
functional objects to make them visually pleasing artists who create applied 
arts or crafts are usually referred to as designers artisans or craftspeople 
defining art there is often confusion about the meaning of the term art because 
multiple meanings of the word are used interchangeably individuals use the word 
art to identify painting as well as singing characteristics of art there follow 
some generally accepted characteristics of art after this there is some 
lengthier discussion of several of those facets perceived as universal or 
central to art encourages an intuitive understanding rather than a rational 
understanding as for example with an article in a scientific journal was 
created with the intention of evoking such an understanding or an attempt at 
such an understanding in the audience was created with no other purpose or 
function other than to be itself a radical pure art definition elusive in that 
the work may communicate on many different levels of appreciation one may take 
the example of gericault s raft of the medusa in the case of which special 
knowledge concerning the shipwreck the painting depicts is not a prerequisite 
to appreciating it but allows the appreciation of gericault s political 
intentions in the piece in relation to the above the piece may offer itself to 
many different interpretations or though it superficially depicts a mundane 
event or object invites reflection upon elevated themes demonstrates a high 
level of ability or fluency within a medium this characteristic might be 
considered a point of contention since many modern artists most notably 
conceptual artists do not themselves create the works they conceive or do not 
even create the work in a conventional demonstrative sense one might think of 
tracey emin s controversial my bed the conferral of a particularly appealing or 
aesthetically satisfying structure or form upon an original set of unrelated 
passive constituents skill art can connote a sense of trained ability or 
mastery of a medium an example of this is the contemporary young master 
josignacio creator of plastic paint medium it can also simply refer to the 
developed and efficient use of a language so as to convey meaning with 
immediacy and or depth a common view is that the epithet art particular in its 
elevated sense requires a certain level of creative expertise by the artist 
whether this be a demonstration of technical ability such as one might find in 
many works of the rennaissance or in the plays of shakespeare or an originality 
in stylistic approach or a combination of these two for example a common 
contemporary criticism of some modern painting occurs along the lines of 
objecting to the apparent lack of skill or ability required in the production 
of the artistic object one might take tracey emin s my bed or hirst s the 
physical impossibility of death in the mind of someone living as examples of 
pieces wherein the artist exercised little to no traditionally recognised sets 
of skills in the first case emin simply slept and engaged in other activities 
in her bed before placing the result in a gallery she has however been 
insistent that there is a high degree of selection and arrangement in this work 
which includes objects such as underwear and bottles around the bed in the 
second case hirst came up with the conceptual design for the artwork although 
he physically particpated in the creation of this piece he has left the 
eventual creation of many other works to employed artisans these approaches are 
exemplary of a particular kind of contemporary art conceptual art the 
exclusionary view that art requires a certain skill level to produce is often 
described as a lay critique it derives from the fact that in western culture at 
least art has traditionally been pushed in the direction of representationalism 
the literal presentation of reality through literal images on the other hand 
criticism has often been brought to bear on modern artists for having no 
creative involvement whatsoever in their creations one might take hirst s work 
again as emblematic of this approach it may be further noted that certain forms 
of art outside a western tradition such as islamic geometric designs and 
calligraphy buddhist or hindu mandalas and celtic knotwork though they are non 
representational still require a measure of skill and certain creative 
involvement in their execution judgments of value somewhat in relation to the 
above the word art is also used to apply judgments of value as in such 
expressions as that meal was a work of art the cook is an artist or the art of 
deception the highly attained level of skill of the deceiver is praised it is 
this use of the word as a measure of high quality and high value that gives the 
term its flavor of subjectivity making judgments of value requires a basis for 
criticism at the simplest level a way to determine whether the impact of the 
object on the senses meets the criteria to be considered art whether it is 
perceived to be attractive or repellent though perception is always colored by 
experience and thus a reaction to art on these grounds is necessarily 
subjective it is commonly taken that that which is not aesthetically satisfying 
in some fashion cannot be art however good art is not always or even regularly 
aesthetically appealing to a majority of viewers in other words an artist s 
prime motivation need not be the pursuit of the aesthetic and art often depicts 
terrible images made for social moral or thought provoking reasons for example 
francisco goya s painting depicting the spanish shootings of three rd of may 
one eight zero eight is a graphic depiction of a firing squad executing several 
pleading civilians yet at the same time the horrific imagery demonstrates goya 
s keen artistic ability in composition and execution and his fitting social and 
political outrage thus the debate continues as to what mode of aesthetic 
satisfaction if any is required to define art the assumption of new values or 
the rebellion against accepted notions of what is aesthetically superior need 
not occur concurrently with a complete abandonment of the pursuit of that which 
is aesthetically appealing indeed the reverse is often true that in the 
revision of what is popularly conceived of as being aesthetically appealing 
allows for a re invigoration of aesthetic sensibility and a new appreciation 
for the standards of art itself countless schools have proposed their own ways 
to define quality yet they all seem to agree in at least one point once their 
aesthetic choices are accepted the value of the work of art is determined by 
its capacity to transcend the limits of its chosen medium in order to strike 
some universal chord or by the rarity of the skill of the artist or in its 
accurate reflection in what is termed the zeitgeist communicating emotion art 
appeals to human emotions it can arouse aesthetic or moral feelings and can be 
understood as a way of communicating these feelings artists have to express 
themselves so that their public is aroused but they do not have to do so 
consciously art explores what is commonly termed as the human condition that is 
essentially what it is to be human and art of a superior kind often brings 
about some new insight concerning humanity not always positive or demonstrates 
a level of skill so fine as to push forward the boundaries of collective human 
ability this is not to say that technical skill is a necessary prerequisite of 
art but rather that a high degree of skill goes some way in conferring a 
judgement of high standard upon an artist or artwork creative impulse from one 
perspective art is a generic term for any product of the creative impulse out 
of which sprang all other human pursuits such as science via alchemy and 
religion via shamanism the term art offers no true definition besides those 
based within the cultural historical and geographical context in which it is 
applied though to the artists themselves the impulse to create is undeniable an 
artist can no more deny that impulse than he she could ignore breathing one 
might compare kandinsky s inner necessity to this popular view it is because of 
the overbearing need to create in the face of financial ruin public obscurity 
or political opposition that artists are typically conceived of as unstable 
even crazy or misguided differences in defining art definitions of art and 
aesthetic arguments usually proceed from one of several possible perspectives 
art may be defined by the intention of the artist as in the writings of dewey 
art may be seen as being in the response emotion of the viewer as tolstoy 
claims in danto s view it can be defined as a character of the item itself or 
as a function of an object s context plato for plato art is a pursuit whose 
adherents are not to be trusted given that their productions imitate the 
sensory world itself an imitation of the divine world of forms art necessarily 
is an imitation of an imitation and thus is hopelessly far from the source of 
the truth plato it may be noted barred artists from access to his ideal city in 
his republic aristotle aristotle saw art in less of a bad light though he 
shared plato s poor opinion of it he nevertheless thought that art might serve 
the purpose of emotional catharsis that is by witnessing the sufferings and 
celebrations of actors onstage onlookers might vicariously experience these 
same feelings themselves and thereby purge such negative feelings institutional 
definition many people s opinions of what art is would fall inside a relatively 
small range of accepted standards or institutional definition of art george 
dickie one nine seven four this derives from education and other social factors 
most people did not consider the depiction of a brillo box or a store bought 
urinal to be art until andy warhol and marcel duchamp respectively placed them 
in the context of art i e the art gallery which then provided the association 
of these objects with the values that define art although strictly speaking 
warhol s artwork was not an actual brillo box but an exact replica of one so it 
met the traditional criterion of skill at the very least most viewers of these 
objects initially rejected such associations because the objects did not 
themselves meet the accepted criteria the objects needed to be absorbed into 
the general consensus of what art is before they achieved the near universal 
acceptance as art in the contemporary era once accepted and viewed with a fresh 
eye the smooth white surfaces of duchamp s urinal are strikingly similar to 
classical marble sculptural forms whether the artist intended it or not this 
type of recontextualizing provides the same spark of connection expected from 
any traditionally created art it should be noted however that duchamps act 
might be as readily interpreted as a demonstration of the not always beneficial 
power of artistic institutions rather than the universal art potentially 
inherent in all objects the placement of an object in an artistic context is 
not taken as a universal standard of art but is a common characteristic of 
conceptual art prevalent since the one nine six zero s notably the stuckist art 
movement criticises this tendency of recent art related issues social criticism 
art is often seen as belonging to one social class and excluding others in this 
context art is seen as a high status activity associated with wealth the 
ability to purchase art and the leisure required to pursue or enjoy it the 
palaces of versailles or the hermitage in st petersburg with their vast 
collections of art amassed by the fabulously wealthy royalty of europe 
exemplify this view collecting such art is the preserve of the rich in one 
viewpoint before the one three th century in europe artisans were considered to 
belong to a lower caste since they were essentially manual labourers after 
europe was re exposed to classical culture during the renaissance particularly 
in the nation states of what is now italy florence siena artists gained an 
association with high status however arrangements of fine and expensive goods 
have always been used by institutions of power as marks of their own status 
this is seen in the two zero th and two one st century by the commissioning or 
purchasing of art by big businesses and corporations as decoration for their 
offices utility there are many who ascribe to certain arts the quality of being 
non utilitarian this fits within the art as good system of definitions and 
suffers from a class prejudice against labor and utility opponents of this view 
argue that all human activity has some utilitarian function and these objects 
claimed to be non utilitarian actually have the rather mundane and banal 
utility of attempting to mystify and codify unworkable justifications for 
arbitrary social hierarchy it might also be argued that non utilitarian is in 
this context a mis usage that art is not in and of itself useless but rather 
that it particularly use does not manifest itself in any traditionally 
demonstrable way though advances in neuroscience may arguably enable the 
isolation of those associated cortices of the brain concerned with the creation 
or appreciation of art art is also used by art therapists and some 
psychotherapists and clinical psychologists as art therapy the end product is 
not the principal goal in this case rather a process of healing through 
creative acts is sought the resultant piece of artwork may also offer insight 
into the troubles experienced by the subject and may suggest suitable 
approaches to be used in more conventional forms of psychiatric therapy the use 
of art from the artist s standpoint is as a means of expression when art is 
conceived as a device it serves several context and perspective specific 
functions from the artist s perspective it allows one to symbolize complex 
ideas and emotions in an arbitrary language subject only to the interpretation 
of the self and peers in a social context it can serve to soothe the soul and 
promote popular morale in a more negative aspect of this facet art is often 
utilised as a form of propaganda and thus can be used to subtly influence 
popular conceptions or mood in some cases artworks are appropriated to be used 
in this manner without the creator s initial intention from a more 
anthropological perspective art is a way of passing ideas and concepts on to 
later generations in a somewhat universal language the interpretation of this 
language is very dependent upon the observer s perspective and context and it 
might be argued that the very subjectivity of art demonstrates its importance 
in providing an arena in which rival ideas might be exchanged and discussed or 
to provide a social context in which disparate groups of people might 
congregate and mingle history of art the term art history typically refers to a 
historical examination of the various trends of the visual arts through certain 
periods of human history it may also be taken to encompass a study of the 
theories of art which may or may not include an examination of their historical 
context symbols much of the development of individual artist deals with finding 
principles for how to express certain ideas through various kinds of symbolism 
for example vasily kandinsky developed his use of color in painting through a 
system of stimulus response where over time he gained an understanding of the 
emotions that can be evoked by color and combinations of color contemporary 
artist andy goldsworthy on the other hand chose to use the medium of found 
natural objects and materials to arrange temporary sculptures cultural 
differences of art several genres of art are grouped by cultural relevance 
examples can be found in terms such as african art american craft islamic art 
asian art as found in buddhist art chinese art japanese art tibetan art thai 
art laotian art visual arts of the united states latin american art see also 
aesthetics the philosophy of beauty art criticism art groups art history art 
sale art school art styles periods and movements art techniques and materials 
art theft artist definition of music applied art fine art modern art 
psychedelic art what is art further reading peter magyar thought palaces 
amsterdam architectura natura press one nine nine nine aristotle metaphysics 
plato theory of forms carl jung man and his symbols gyorgy doczi the power of 
limits benedetto croce aesthetic as science of expression and general 
linguistic one nine zero two louis torres michelle marder kamhi what art is the 
esthetic theory of ayn rand open court two zero zero zero external links 
resources online arts artlex com dictionary of art terms artcyclopedia com 
reference site art on topic net art topic reference site art atlas net the 
international art directory the art millennium comprehensive art encyclopedia 
history of art world history of art hamilton museum of art online educational 
art museum professional links the art museum partnership american association 
of museums art top one zero actors in period costume sharing a joke whilst 
waiting between takes during location filming an actor is a person who acts or 
plays a role in an artistic production the term commonly refers to someone 
working in movies television live theatre or radio and can occasionally denote 
a street entertainer besides playing dramatic roles actors may also sing or 
dance or work only on radio or as a voice artist a female actor may be known as 
an actress although the term actor is also used as a gender neutral term an 
actor usually plays a fictional character in the case of a true story or a 
fictional story that portrays real people an actor may play a real person or a 
fictional version of the same occasionally actors appear as themselves 
etymology actor is directly from the masculine latin noun actor feminine actrix 
from the verb agere to do to drive to pass time the suffix or so st who 
performs the action indicated by the stem alternatively from greek aktor leader 
from the verb ag to lead or carry to convey to bring history the first recorded 
case of an actor performing took place in five three four bc probably on two 
three november though the changes in calendar over the years make it hard to 
determine exactly when the greek performer thespis stepped on to the stage at 
the theatre dionysus and became the first person to speak words as a character 
in a play the machinations of storytelling were immediately revolutionized 
prior to thespis act stories were told in song and dance and in third person 
narrative but no one had assumed the role of a character in a story in honour 
of thespis actors are commonly called thespians theatrical myth to this day 
maintains that thespis exists as a mischievous spirit and disasters in the 
theatre are sometimes blamed on his ghostly intervention actors were 
traditionally not people of high status and in the early middle ages travelling 
acting troupes were often viewed with distrust however this negative perception 
dramaticaly changed in two zero th century as acting became an honored and 
popular profession and art part of the reason is due to the rise of the popular 
appeal and access to dramatic film entertainment and the resulting rise of the 
movie star in social status and the large salaries they commanded the 
combination of public presence and wealth had a profound rehabilitation to the 
image in the past only men could become actors in the ancient and medieval 
world it was considered disgraceful for a woman to go on the stage and this 
belief continued right up until the one seven th century when in venice it was 
broken in the time of william shakespeare women s roles were played by men or 
boys though there is some evidence to suggest that women disguised as men also 
illegally performed actors playing the opposite sex women sometimes play the 
roles of prepubescent boys because in some regards a woman has a closer 
resemblance to a boy than does a man the role of peter pan for example is 
traditionally played by a woman the tradition of the principal boy in pantomime 
may be compared an adult playing a child occurs more in theater than in film 
the exception to this is voice actors in animated films where boys are 
generally voiced by women as heard in the simpsons opera has several pants 
roles traditionally sung by women usually mezzo sopranos examples are hansel in 
h nsel und gretel and cherubino in the marriage of figaro mary pickford played 
the part of little lord fauntleroy in the first film version of the book linda 
hunt won an academy award for best supporting actress in the year of living 
dangerously in which she played the part of a man having an actor play the 
opposite sex for comic effect is also a long standing tradition in comic 
theatre and film most of shakespeare s comedies include instances of cross 
dressing and both dustin hoffman and robin williams appeared in hit comedy 
films where they were required to play most scenes dressed as women tony curtis 
and jack lemmon famously posed as women to escape gangsters in the billy wilder 
film some like it hot techniques of acting actors employ a variety of 
techniques that are learned through training and experience some of these are 
the rigorous use of the voice to communicate a character s lines and express 
emotion this is achieved through attention to diction and projection through 
correct breathing and articulation it is also achieved through the tone and 
emphasis that an actor puts on words physicalisation of a role in order to 
create a believable character for the audience and to use the acting space 
appropriately and correctly use of gesture to complement the voice interact 
with other actors and to bring emphasis to the words in a play as well as 
having symbolic meaning shakespeare is believed to have been commenting on the 
acting style and techniques of his era when hamlet gives his famous advice to 
the players speak the speech i pray you as i pronounced it to you trippingly on 
the tongue but if you mouth it as many of your players do i had as lief the 
town crier spoke my lines nor do not saw the air too much with your hand thus 
but use all gently for in the very torrent tempest and as i may say the 
whirlwind of passion you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it 
smoothness o it offends me to the soul to hear a robustious periwig pated 
fellow tear a passion to tatters to very rags to split the ears of the 
groundlings who for the most part are capable of nothing but inexplicable 
dumbshows and noise i would have such a fellow whipped for o erdoing termagant 
it out herods herod pray you avoid it be not too tame neither but let your own 
discretion be your tutor suit the action to the word the word to the action 
with this special observance o erstep not the modesty of nature for any thing 
so overdone is from the purpose of playing whose end both at the first and now 
was and is to hold as twere the mirror up to nature to show virtue her own 
feature scorn her own image and the very age and body of the time his form and 
pressure now this overdone or come tardy off though it make the unskilful laugh 
cannot but make the judicious grieve the censure of the which one must in your 
allowance o erweigh a whole theatre of others o there be players that i have 
seen play and heard others praise and that highly not to speak it profanely 
that neither having the accent of christians nor the gait of christian pagan 
nor man have so strutted and bellowed that i have thought some of nature s 
journeymen had made men and not made them well they imitated humanity so 
abominably o reform it altogether and let those that play your clowns speak no 
more than is set down for them for there be of them that will themselves laugh 
to set on some quantity of barren spectators to laugh too though in the mean 
time some necessary question of the play be then to be considered that s 
villanous and shows a most pitiful ambition in the fool that uses it go make 
you ready acting awards academy awards also known as the oscars for film golden 
globe awards for film and television emmy awards for television genie awards 
for film gemini awards for television british academy of film and television 
arts award for film and television tony awards for the theatre specifically 
broadway theatre european theatre awards for the theatre laurence olivier 
awards for the theatre screen actors guild awards for actors in film and 
television see also acting celebrities charisma method acting movie star stunt 
work suggested reading an actor prepares by konstantin stanislavski theatre 
arts books isbn zero eight seven eight three zero nine eight three seven one 
nine eight nine a dream of passion the development of the method by lee 
strasberg plume books isbn zero four five two two six one nine eight eight one 
nine nine zero sanford meisner on acting by sanford meisner vintage isbn zero 
three nine four seven five zero five nine four one nine eight seven letters to 
a young actor by robert brustein basic books isbn zero four six five zero zero 
eight zero six two two zero zero five the alexander technique manual by richard 
brennan connections book publishing isbn one eight five nine zero six one six 
three x two zero zero four actors entertainment occupations agnostida the 
agnostids is an order of trilobite these small trilobites first appeared toward 
the end of the lower cambrian and thrived in the middle cambrian the last 
agnostids held out until the late ordovician the agnostida are divided into two 
suborders agnostina and eodiscina that are then divided into a number of 
families the eodiscina appear to be normal trilobites with only two or three 
segments in the thorax some resemble trilobites of the order ptychopariida as a 
group agnostids have pygidia tails that are similar in size and shape to their 
cephalons heads neither looks much like the corresponding regions of other 
trilobites there has been more than one argument about which end is the head 
agnostids were probably benthic bottom dwelling creatures most agnostid species 
have no eyes they likely lived on areas of the ocean floor that received little 
or no light and fed on detritus that descended from upper layers of the sea to 
the bottom unfortunately the appendages are known only for one genus of 
agnostid the legs of that genus look much more like crustacean legs than the 
legs of other trilobites with preserved appendages this has caused many 
taxonomists to question whether the agnostids are truly trilobites another view 
is that the agnostids represent the first line to have diverged from the 
trilobites however four orders of trilobites redlichiida corynexochida 
naraoidia ptychopariida considerably predate the earliest agnostids in the 
fossil record agnostina are generally referred to simply as agnostids even 
though they probably should be called agnostines external links agnostida fact 
sheet a guide to the eight orders of trilobites by sam gon iii prehistoric 
arthropods an abortion is the termination of a pregnancy associated with the 
death of an embryo or a fetus this can occur spontaneously in the form of a 
miscarriage or be intentionally induced through chemical surgical or other 
means generally abortions are performed by gynaecologists or obstetricians all 
mammalian pregnancies can be aborted however this article focuses exclusively 
on the abortion of human pregnancy there have been various methods of inducing 
an abortion throughout the centuries in the two zero th century the ethics and 
morality of abortion became the subject of intense political debate in many 
areas of the world definitions pregnancy is defined by the medical community as 
beginning at the implantation of the embryo others differ however placing this 
initiation at conception the following medical terms are used to define an 
abortion spontaneous abortion miscarriage an abortion due to accidental trauma 
or natural causes induced abortion an abortion deliberately caused induced 
abortions are further subcategorized into therapeutic abortions and elective 
abortions therapeutic abortion to save the life of the pregnant woman to 
preserve the woman s physical or mental health to terminate a pregnancy that 
would result in the birth of a child with defects which would be incompatible 
with life or associated with significant morbidity to selectively reduce the 
number of fetuses in a multiple pregnancy to lessen health risks involved 
elective abortion an abortion performed for any other reason methods of birth 
control that prevent implantation such as emergency contraception are not 
considered to be abortion however emergency contraception is generally 
considered equivalent to abortion by those who reject the medical definition of 
pregnancy a pregnancy that ends earlier than three seven completed weeks of 
gestation and where an infant is born and survives is termed a premature birth 
a pregnancy that ends with an infant dead upon birth at any gestational stage 
due to causes including spontaneous abortion or complications during delivery 
is termed a stillbirth in common parlance the term abortion is synonymous with 
induced abortion of a human fetus incidence the incidence of and reasons for 
induced abortion vary in regions in which abortion is generally permitted it 
has been estimated that the total number of induced abortions performed 
globally is approximately four six million per year two six million of these 
are said to occur in places in which abortion is legal the other two zero 
million happen where it is illegal some countries such as belgium and the 
netherlands experience a low rate of induced abortion while others like russia 
and vietnam have a comparatively high rate a one nine nine eight study 
aggregated data from studies in two seven countries on the reasons women seek 
to terminate their pregnancies it concluded that common factors cited to have 
influenced the abortion decision were the desire to delay or end childbearing 
concern over the interruption of work or education issues of financial or 
relationship stability and perceived immaturity in finland and the united 
states concern for the health risks posed by pregnancy in individual cases was 
not a factor commonly given whereas in bangladesh india and kenya such a 
concern was found to be more prevalent a two zero zero four study in which 
american women at clinics answered a questionnaire yielded similar results some 
abortions are undergone as the result of societal pressures such as eugenics 
the stigmatization of disabled persons preference for children of a specific 
sex disapproval of single motherhood insufficient economic support for families 
lack of access to or rejection of contraceptive methods or efforts toward 
population control such as china s one child policy a combination of these 
factors can sometimes result in forced abortion forced sterilization 
infanticide child abandonment or sex selective abortion and infanticide which 
is illegal in most countries but difficult to stop in many areas especially in 
developing nations or where abortion is illegal women sometimes resort to back 
alley or self induced procedures the world health organization suggests that 
there are one nine million terminations annually which fit its criteria for an 
unsafe abortion see social issues for more information on these subjects forms 
of abortion spontaneous abortion spontaneous abortions generally referred to as 
miscarriages occur when an embryo or fetus is lost due to natural causes a 
miscarriage is spontaneous loss of the embryo or fetus before the two zero th 
week of development spontaneous abortions after the two zero th week are 
generally considered to be preterm deliveries most miscarriages occur very 
early in a pregnancy approximately one zero five zero of pregnancies end in 
miscarriage depending upon the age and health of the pregnant woman the risk 
for spontaneous abortion is greater in those with a history of more than three 
previous known spontaneous abortions those who have had a previous induced 
abortion those with systemic diseases and in women over age three five other 
causes can be infection of either the woman or the fetus immune responses or 
serious systemic diseases of the woman a spontaneous abortion can also be 
caused by accidental trauma intentional trauma to cause miscarriage is 
considered an induced abortion some governments have laws increasing the 
criminal liability of a person who causes a miscarriage during an assault or 
other violent crime induced abortion a pregnancy can be intentionally aborted 
in a number of ways the manner selected depends chiefly upon the gestational 
age of the fetus in addition to the legality regional availability and or 
doctor patient preference for specific procedures surgical abortion u s 
president george w bush signs the partial birth abortion ban act of two zero 
zero three in the first fifteen weeks suction aspiration or vacuum abortion is 
the most common method manual vacuum aspiration or mva abortion consists of 
removing the fetus or embryo by suction using a manual syringe while the 
electric vacuum aspiration or eva abortion method uses an electric pump these 
techniques are equivalent differing only in the mechanism use to apply suction 
from the fifteenth week up until around the twenty sixth week a surgical 
dilation and evacuation d e is used d e consists of opening the cervix of the 
uterus and emptying it using surgical instruments and suction dilation and 
curettage d c is a standard gynaecological procedure performed for a variety of 
reasons including examination of the uterine lining for possible malignancy 
investigation of abnormal bleeding and abortion curettage refers to the 
cleaning of the walls of the uterus with a curette the world health 
organization recommends this sort of procedure also called sharp curettage only 
when mva is unavailable sharp curettage only accounted for two four of abortion 
procedures in the us in two zero zero two the term d and c can more generally 
be used to refer to the first trimester abortion procedure irrespective of the 
method used to perform the procedure other techniques must be used to induce 
abortion in the third trimester premature delivery can be induced with 
prostaglandin this can be coupled with injecting the amniotic fluid with 
caustic solutions containing saline or urea very late abortions can be brought 
about by intact dilation and extraction intact d x which requires the surgical 
decompression of the fetus s head before evacuation and is sometimes termed 
partial birth abortion a hysterotomy abortion similar to a caesarian section 
but resulting in a terminated fetus can also be used at late stages of 
pregnancy it can be performed vaginally with an incision just above the cervix 
in the late mid trimester chemical abortion the molecular structure of the 
abortifacient drug mifepristone effective in the first trimester of pregnancy 
chemical also referred to as a medical abortion or non surgical abortions 
comprise one zero of all abortions in the united states and europe the process 
begins with the administration of either methotrexate or mifepristone followed 
by misoprostol when appropriately used nine eight of women undergoing medical 
termination of pregnancy will experience completed abortion without surgical 
intervention the food and drug administration currently approves the use of 
mifepristone up to four nine days gestation seven weeks though evidence based 
regimens exist for its use up to six one days gestation with similar success 
rates misoprostol alone can also be used though it is not fda approved for this 
purpose misoprostol cytotec alone has the advantage of costing less than one 
dollar for an effective dose as opposed to several hundred dollars for an 
effective dose of mifepristone in cases of failure of medical abortion vacuum 
or manual aspiration is used to complete the abortion surgically other means of 
abortion historically a number of herbs reputed to possess abortifacient 
properties have been used in folk medicine tansy pennyroyal black cohosh and 
the now extinct silphium see history of abortion the use of herbs in such a 
manner can cause serious even lethal side effects such as multiple organ 
failure and is not recommended by physicians abortion is sometimes attempted 
through means of trauma to the abdomen the degree of force applied if severe 
can cause serious internal injuries without necessarily succeeding in inducing 
miscarriage both accidental and deliberate abortions of this kind can be 
subject to criminal liability in many countries in burma indonesia malaysia the 
philippines and thailand there is an ancient tradition of attempting abortion 
through forceful abdominal massage reported methods of unsafe self induced 
abortion include the misuse of the ulcer drug misoprostol and the insertion of 
non surgical implements such as knitting needles and clothes hangers into the 
uterus health effects early term surgical abortion is a simple procedure and 
when performed by competent doctors and in some states nurse practitioners 
nurse midwives and physician assistants in first world nations before the one 
six th week is safer than carrying the pregnancy to term as with most surgical 
procedures the most common surgical abortion methods carry the risk of 
potentially serious complications these risks include a perforated uterus 
perforated bowel or bladder septic shock sterility and death the risk of 
complications occurring can increase depending on how far the pregnancy has 
progressed but may be counterbalanced by complications that would occur from 
carrying the pregnancy to term it is difficult to accurately assess the risks 
of induced abortion due to a number of factors these factors include wide 
variation in the quality of abortion services in different societies and among 
different socio economic groups a lack of uniform definitions of terms and 
difficulties in patient follow up and after care the degree of risk is also 
dependent upon the skill and experience of the practitioner maternal age health 
and parity gestational age pre existing conditions methods and instruments used 
medications used the skill and experience of those assisting the practitioner 
and the quality of recovery and follow up care a highly skilled practitioner 
operating under ideal conditions will tend to have a very low rate of 
complications an inexperienced practitioner in an ill equipped and ill staffed 
facility on the other hand will often have a higher incidence of complications 
in the united kingdom the number of deaths due to legal abortion between the 
years of one nine nine one and one nine nine three was five as compared to the 
nine deaths caused by ectopic pregnancy during the same time frame in the 
united states during the year one nine nine nine there were a total of four 
deaths due to legal abortion some practitioners advocate using minimal 
anesthesia so that the patient can alert them to possible complications others 
recommend general anesthesia in order to prevent patient movement which might 
cause a perforation general anesthesia carries its own risks including death 
which is why public health officials recommend against its routine use dilation 
of the cervix carries the risk of cervical tears or perforations including 
small tears that might not be apparent and might cause cervical incompetence in 
future pregnancies most practitioners recommend using the smallest possible 
dilators and using osmotic rather than mechanical dilators after the first 
trimester of pregnancy instruments are placed within the uterus to remove the 
fetus these can on rare occasions cause perforation or laceration of the uterus 
and damage to structures surrounding the uterus laceration or perforation of 
the uterus or cervix can again on rare occasions lead to even more serious 
complications incomplete emptying of the uterus can cause hemorrhage and 
infection use of ultrasound verification of the location and duration of the 
pregnancy prior to abortion with immediate follow up of patients reporting 
continuing pregnancy symptoms after the procedure will virtually eliminate this 
risk the sooner a complication is noted and properly treated the lower the risk 
of permanent injury or death in rare cases the abortion will be unsuccessful 
and the pregnancy will continue an unsuccessful abortion can also result in the 
delivery of a live neonate or infant this termed a failed abortion is more 
likely to occur if the procedure is carried out later in the pregnancy some 
doctors faced with this situation have voiced concerns about the ethical and 
legal ramifications of then letting the neonate die as a result recent 
investigations have been launched in the united kingdom by the confidential 
enquiry into maternal and child health cemach and the royal college of 
obstetricians and gynecologists in order to determine how widespread the 
problem is and what an ethical response in the treatment of the infant might be 
use of other methods e g overdose of various drugs insertion of various objects 
into uterus for abortion is potentially dangerous carrying a significantly 
elevated risk for permanent injury or death compared to abortions done by 
physicians suggested effects there is controversy over a number of proposed 
risks and effects of abortion evidence whether in support of or against such 
claims might in part be influenced by the political and religious beliefs of 
the parties behind it breast cancer the abortion breast cancer abc hypothesis 
posits a causal relationship between having an induced abortion and a higher 
risk of developing breast cancer in the future an increased level of estrogen 
in early pregnancy helps to initiate cellular differentiation growth in the 
breast in preparation for lactation if this process is terminated through 
abortion before full differentiation in the third trimester then more 
vulnerable undifferentiated cells will be left than there were prior to the 
pregnancy it is proposed that this might result in an elevated risk of breast 
cancer the majority of interview based studies have indicated a link and some 
have been demonstrated to be statistically significant but there remains debate 
as to their reliability because of possible response bias larger and more 
recent record based studies such as one in one nine nine seven which used data 
from two national registries in denmark found the correlation to be negligible 
to non existent after statistical adjustment the national cancer institute 
conducted an official workshop with dozens of experts on the issue between 
february two four february two six two zero zero three which concluded from its 
examination of various evidence that it is well established that induced 
abortion is not associated with an increase in breast cancer risk these 
findings and how the denmark study statistically adjusted their overall results 
have been disputed by dr joel brind an invitee to the workshop and the leading 
scientific advocate of the abortion breast cancer hypothesis nevertheless gaps 
and inconsistencies remain in the research and the subject continues to be one 
of political and scientific contention fetal pain the experience of the fetus 
during abortion is a matter of medical ethical and public policy concern 
evidence is conflicting with some authorities holding that the fetus is capable 
of feeling pain from the first trimester and others maintaining that the neuro 
anatomical requirements for such experience do not exist until the second or 
third trimester pain receptors begin to appear in the seventh week of pregnancy 
the thalamus the part of the brain which receives signals from the nervous 
system and then relays them to the cerebral cortex starts to form in the fifth 
week however other anatomical structures involved in the nociceptic process are 
not present until much later in gestation links between the thalamus and 
cerebral cortex aren t forged until around the two three rd week researchers 
have observed changes in the heart rates and hormonal levels of newborn infants 
after circumcision blood tests and surgery effects which were alleviated with 
the administration of anesthesia others suggest that the human experience of 
pain being more than just physiological cannot be measured in such reflexive 
responses mental health some women will experience negative feelings as a 
result of elective abortion however whether this phenomenon is significant 
enough to warrant a general diagnosis or even classification as an independent 
syndrome see post abortion syndrome is a subject that is debated among members 
of the medical community data on the incidence of clinical depression mental 
illness post traumatic stress disorder and suicide in association with abortion 
remain inconclusive a comparative analysis of the suicide rates among 
postpartum and post abortive women in finland found a statistical correlation 
between abortion and suicide other studies have suggested a link between the 
elective termination of an unwanted pregnancy and an improvement in reported 
mental well being elective abortion may reduce the occurrence of depression in 
cases of unwanted pregnancy as compared to cases in which the pregnancy has 
been carried to completion but it is also sometimes reported as an additional 
stressor ibid the majority of evidence would seem to indicate that adverse 
emotional reactions to the procedure are most strongly influenced by pre 
existing psychological conditions and other negative factors ibid spontaneous 
abortion or miscarriage is known to present an increased risk of depression in 
women history of abortion bottom most dr caton s tansy pills an example of a 
clandestine advertisement the practice of induced abortion according to some 
anthropologists can be traced to ancient times there is evidence to suggest 
that historically pregnancies were terminated through a number of methods 
including the administration of abortifacient herbs the use of sharpened 
implements the application of abdominal pressure and other techniques soranus a 
two nd century greek physician suggested in his work gynecology that women 
wishing to abort their pregnancies should engage in violent exercise energetic 
jumping carrying heavy objects and riding animals he also prescribed a number 
of recipes for herbal bathes pessaries and bloodletting but advised against the 
use of sharp instruments to induce miscarriage due to the risk of organ 
perforation it is also known that the ancient greeks relied upon the herb 
silphium as both a contraceptive and an abortifacient the plant as the chief 
export of cyrene was driven to extinction but it is suggested that it might 
have possessed the same abortive properties as some of its closest extant 
relatives in the apiaceae family such folk remedies however varied in 
effectiveness and were not without risk tansy and pennyroyal for example are 
two poisonous herbs with serious side effects that have at times been used to 
terminate pregnancy one nine th century medicine saw advances in the fields of 
surgery anaesthesia and sanitation in the same era that doctors with the 
american medical association lobbied for bans on abortion in the united states 
and the british parliament passed the offences against the person act demand 
for the procedure continued however as the disguised but nonetheless open 
advertisement of abortion services in victorian times would seem to suggest 
social issues a number of of complex issues exist in the debate over abortion 
these like the suggested effects upon health listed above are a focus of 
research and a fixture of discussion among members on all sides the controversy 
effect upon crime rate a controversial theory attempts to draw a correlation 
between the unprecedented nationwide decline of the overall crime rate 
witnessed in the united states during the one nine nine zero s and the 
decriminalization of abortion two zero years prior the suggestion was brought 
to widespread attention by a one nine nine nine academic paper the impact of 
legalized abortion on crime authored by the economists steven d levitt and john 
donohue they attributed the drop in crime to a reduction in individuals said to 
have a higher statistical probability of committing crimes unwanted children 
especially those born to mothers who are african american impoverished 
adolescent uneducated and single the change coincided with what would ve been 
the adolescence or peak years of potential criminality of those who had not 
been born as a result of roe v wade and similar cases donohue and levitt s 
study also noted that states which legalized abortion before the rest of the 
nation experienced the lowering crime rate pattern earlier and that those with 
higher abortion rates had more pronounced reductions fellow economists 
christopher foote and christopher goetz criticized the methodology in the 
donahue levitt study noting a lack of accommodation for statewide yearly 
variations such as cocaine use and recalculating based on incidence of crime 
per capita they found no statistically significant results levitt and donohue 
responded to this by presenting an adjusted data set which took into account 
these concerns but they claim maintained the statistical significance of their 
initial paper such research has been criticized by some as being utilitarian 
discriminatory as to race and socioeconomic class and as promoting eugenics as 
a solution to crime levitt states in his book freakonomics that they are 
neither promoting nor negating any course of action merely reporting data as 
economists sex selective abortion the advent of both ultrasound and 
amniocentesis has allowed parents to determine sex before birth this has lead 
to the occurrence of sex selective abortion or the targeted termination of a 
fetus based upon its gender it is suggested that sex selective abortion might 
be partially responsible for the noticeable disparities between the birth rates 
of male and female children in some places the preference for male children is 
reported in many areas of asia and the use of abortion to limit female births 
has been reported in mainland china taiwan south korea and india in india the 
economic role of men the costs associated with dowries and a hindu tradition 
which dictates that funeral rites must be performed by a male relative have 
lead to a cultural preference for sons the widespread availability of 
diagnostic testing during the one nine seven zero s and eight zero s lead to 
advertisements for services which read invest five zero zero rupees for a sex 
test now save five zero zero zero zero rupees for a dowry later in one nine 
nine one the male to female sex ratio in india was skewed from its biological 
norm of one zero five to one zero zero to an average of one zero eight to one 
zero zero researchers have asserted that between one nine eight five and two 
zero zero five as many as one zero million female fetuses may have been 
selectively aborted the indian government passed an official ban of pre natal 
sex screening in one nine nine four and moved to pass a complete ban of sex 
selective abortion in two zero zero two in the people s republic of china there 
is also a historic son preference the implementation of the one child policy in 
one nine seven nine in response to population concerns lead to an increased 
disparities in the sex ratio as parents attempted to circumvent the law through 
sex selective abortion or the abandonment of unwanted daughters sex selective 
abortion might be a part of what is behind the shift from the baseline male to 
female birth rate to an elevated national rate of one one seven one zero zero 
reported in two zero zero two the trend was more pronounced in rural regions as 
high as one three zero one zero zero in guangdong and one three five one zero 
zero in hainan a ban upon the practice of sex selective abortion was enacted in 
two zero zero three unsafe abortion where and when access to safe abortion has 
been barred due to explicit sanctions or general unavailability women seeking 
to terminate their pregnancies have sometimes resorted to unsafe methods back 
alley abortion is a slang term for any abortion not practiced under ideal 
conditions of sanitation and professionalism the world health organization 
defines an unsafe abortion as being a procedure carried out by persons lacking 
the necessary skills or in an environment that does not conform to minimal 
medical standards or both this can include a person without medical training a 
professional health provider operating in sub standard conditions or the woman 
herself unsafe abortion remains a public health concern today due to the higher 
incidence and severity of its associated complications such as incomplete 
abortion sepsis hemorrhage and damage to internal organs who estimates that one 
nine million unsafe abortions occur around the world annually and that six 
eight zero zero zero of these result in the death of a woman complications of 
unsafe abortion are said to account globally for approximately one three of all 
maternal mortalities with regional estimates including one two in asia two five 
in latin america and one three in sub saharan africa health education access to 
family planning and improvements in healthcare during and after abortion have 
been proposed to address this phenomenon abortion debate pro life activists in 
washington dc stage a silent demonstration before the supreme court over the 
course of the history of abortion induced abortions have been a source of 
considerable debate and controversy regarding the morality and legality of this 
practice an individual s position on the complex ethical moral philosophical 
biological and legal issues have a strong relationship with that individual s 
value system a person s position on abortion may be best described as a 
combination of their personal beliefs on the morality of abortion and that 
person s beliefs on the ethical scope and responsibility of legitimate 
governmental and legal authority another factor for many individuals is 
religious doctrine see religion and abortion abortion debates especially 
pertaining to abortion laws are often spearheaded by advocacy groups belonging 
to one of two camps most often those in favor of legal prohibition of abortion 
describe themselves as pro life while those against legal restrictions on 
abortion describe themselves as pro choice both are used to indicate the 
central principles in arguments for and against abortion is the fetus a human 
being with a fundamental right to life for pro life advocates and for those who 
are pro choice does a woman have the right to choose whether or not to have an 
abortion in both public and private debate arguments presented in favor of or 
against abortion focus on either the moral permissibility of an induced 
abortion or justification of laws permitting or restricting abortion arguments 
on morality and legality tend to collide and combine complicating the issue at 
hand debate also focuses on whether the pregnant woman should have to notify 
and or have the consent of others in distinct cases a minor her parents a 
legally married or common law wife her husband or a pregnant woman the 
biological father in a two zero zero three gallup poll in the united states 
seven two of respondents were in favor of spousal notification with two six 
opposed of those polled seven nine of males and six seven of females responded 
in favor public opinion political sides have largely been divided into 
absolutes the abortion debate as such tends to center around individuals who 
hold strong positions however public opinion varies from poll to poll country 
to country and region to region australia in a february two zero zero five ac 
nielsen poll as reported in the age five six thought the current abortion laws 
which generally allow abortion for the sake of life or health were about right 
one six want changes in law to make abortion more accessible and one seven want 
changes to make it less accessible a one nine nine eight poll conducted by roy 
morgan research asked do you approve of the termination of unwanted pregnancies 
through surgical abortion six five of the australians polled stated that they 
approved of surgical abortion and two five stated that they disapproved of it 
canada a recent poll of canadians conducted in april two zero zero five by 
gallup found that five two of those polled want abortion laws to remain the 
same two zero want the laws to be less strict and two four would prefer that 
the laws become more strict an earlier gallup poll from december two zero zero 
one asked do you think abortions should be legal under any circumstances legal 
only under certain circumstances or illegal in all circumstances and in what 
circumstances three two of canadians responded that they believe abortion 
should be legal in all circumstance five two that it should be legal in certain 
circumstances and one four that it should be legal in no circumstances see 
abortion in canada ireland a one nine nine seven irish times mrbi poll of the 
republic of ireland s electorate found that one eight believe that abortion 
should never be permitted three five that one should be allowed in the event 
that the woman s life is threatened one eight if her health is at risk two 
eight that an abortion should be provided to those who need it and five were 
undecided the united kingdom an online yougov daily telegraph poll in august 
two zero zero five found that three zero of britons would back a measure to 
reduce the legal limit for abortion to two zero weeks one nine support a limit 
of one two weeks nine support a limit of less than one two weeks and two five 
support maintaining the current limit of two four weeks six responded that 
abortion should never be allowed while two said it should be permitted 
throughout the entirety of pregnancy the united states in a january two zero 
zero six cbs news poll which asked what is your personal feeling about abortion 
two seven said that abortion should be permitted in all cases one five that it 
should be permitted but subject to greater restrictions than it is now three 
three that it should be permitted only in cases such as rape incest or to save 
the woman s life one seven that it should only be permitted to save the woman s 
life and five that it should never be permitted a november two zero zero five 
pew research center poll asked in one nine seven three the roe versus wade 
decision established a woman s constitutional right to an abortion at least in 
the first three months of pregnancy would you like to see the supreme court 
completely overturn its roe versus wade decision or not with two nine 
indicating they want it overturned and six five that they do not abortion law 
international status of abortion law the soviet union one nine two zero and 
iceland one nine three five were some of the first countries to generally allow 
abortion the second half of the twentieth century saw the liberalization of 
abortion laws in many other countries in one nine seven three the u s supreme 
court struck down state laws banning abortion ruling that such laws violated an 
inferred right to privacy in the u s constitution the supreme court of canada 
similarly discarded its criminal code regarding abortion in one nine eight 
eight after ruling that such restrictions violated the security of person 
guaranteed to women under in the canadian charter of rights and freedoms in the 
case of r v morgentaler canada later struck down provincial regulations of 
abortion in the case of r v morgentaler one nine nine three ireland on the 
other hand added an amendment to its constitution in one nine eight three by 
popular referendum recognizing the right to life of the unborn see abortion in 
ireland current laws pertaining to abortion are diverse religious moral and 
cultural sensibilities continue to influence abortion laws throughout the world 
the right to life the right to liberty and the right to security of person are 
major issues of human rights that are sometimes used as justification for the 
existence or the absence of laws controlling abortion many countries in which 
abortion is legal require that certain criteria be met in order for an abortion 
to be obtained often but not always using a trimester based system to regulate 
the window in which abortion is still legal to perform in the united states 
some states impose a two four hour waiting period before the procedure 
prescribe the distribution of information on fetal development or require that 
parents be contacted if their minor daughter requests an abortion in the united 
kingdom as in some other countries two doctors must first certify that an 
abortion is medically or socially necessary before it can be performed other 
countries in which abortion is illegal will allow one to be performed in the 
case of rape incest or danger to the pregnant woman s life or health a handful 
of nations ban abortion entirely such as chile el salvador and malta see also 
abortion in australia abortion in canada abortion in ireland abortion in the 
united kingdom abortion in the united states adoption partial birth abortion 
pregnancy religion and abortion selective reduction self induced abortion 
wrongful abortion sources reproductive endocrinology and infertility recurrent 
pregnancy loss recurrent miscarriage n d retrieved two zero zero six zero one 
one eight from washington university school of medicine department of 
obstetrics and gynecology web site henshaw stanley k singh susheela abortions 
one nine eight four two zero zero four two zero zero five retrieved two zero 
zero six zero one one seven from web japan statistics bureau two zero zero four 
current population estimates as of october one two zero zero four retrieved two 
zero zero six zero one two eight ewing ian statistics new zealand two zero zero 
five zero six one five abortions year ended december two zero zero four 
retrieved two zero zero six zero one one seven statistics new zealand two zero 
zero five zero five one five demographic trends two zero zero four retrieved 
two zero zero six zero one two eight statistics norway two zero zero five zero 
six zero eight induced abortions by woman s county of residence one nine eight 
zero two zero zero four retrieved two zero zero six zero one one seven 
statistics norway two zero zero five population by age sex marital status and 
foreign citizenship retrieved two zero zero six zero one two eight health 
systems trust n d tops terminations of pregnancy retrieved two zero zero six 
zero one one seven statistics south africa two zero zero one zero seven zero 
two mid year estimates two zero zero one retrieved two zero zero six zero one 
two eight nilsson emma fifty babies a year are alive after abortion the sunday 
times retrieved two zero zero six zero one one one american abortion breast 
cancer studies melbye m wohlfahrt j olsen j h frisch m westergaard t helweg 
larsen k et al one nine nine seven induced abortion and the risk of breast 
cancer electronic version new england journal of medicine three three six eight 
one five retrieved two zero zero six zero one one one from pubmed national 
cancer institute two zero zero three zero three zero four summary report early 
reproductive events and breast cancer workshop retrieved two zero zero six zero 
one one one national cancer institute two zero zero three minority dissenting 
comment regarding early reproductive events and breast cancer workshop 
retrieved two zero zero six zero one one one parliamentary office of science 
and technology one nine nine seven fetal awareness retrieved two zero zero six 
zero one one one mulligan larossa maureen crime abortion study continues to 
draw pro life backlash one nine nine nine zero eight one one the pro life 
infonet retrieved two zero zero six zero two one seven from ohio roundtable 
online library abortion and the lower crime rate two zero zero zero january st 
anthony messenger retrieved two zero zero six zero two one seven banister 
judith one nine nine nine zero three one six son preference in asia report of a 
symposium retrieved two zero zero six zero one one two mutharayappa rangamuthia 
kim choe minja arnold fred selective abortion blamed for india s missing girls 
reuters alertnet retrieved two zero zero six zero one zero nine mudur ganapati 
two zero zero two india plans new legislation to prevent sex selection british 
medical journal news roundup retrieved two zero zero six zero one one two 
graham maureen j larsen ulla china bans sex selection abortion two zero zero 
two zero three two two xinhua news agency retrieved two zero zero six zero one 
one two salter c johnson h b and hengen n one nine nine seven care for 
postabortion complications saving women s lives population reports two five one 
retrieved two zero zero six zero two two two world health organization one nine 
nine eight address unsafe abortion retrieved two zero zero six zero three zero 
one the pew research center for the people and the press two zero zero five one 
one zero two public opinion supports alito on spousal notification even as it 
favors roe v wade pew research center pollwatch retrieved two zero zero six 
zero three zero one grattan michelle two zero zero five zero two one six poll 
backs abortion laws the age retrieved two zero zero six zero one one one roy 
morgan international one nine nine eight zero three zero three almost two 
thirds of australians approve of abortion retrieved two zero zero six zero one 
one one kennedy geraldine one nine nine seven one two one one seven seven say 
limited abortion right should be provided the irish times retrieved two zero 
zero six zero one one one yougov two zero zero five zero seven three zero 
yougov daily telegraph survey results retrieved two zero zero six zero one one 
one the polling report two zero zero six retrieved two zero zero six zero one 
one one the pew forum on religion public life two zero zero five one one two 
nine abortion seen as most important issue for supreme court retrieved two zero 
zero six zero one one two external links abortion statistics and other data 
abortion laws of the world abortion policies a global review the following 
links may be biased abortion com the alan guttmacher institute american life 
league carenet just facts abortion planned parenthood abortion in law an 
abstract is a brief statement that contains the most important points of a long 
legal document or of several related legal papers abstraction of title the 
abstraction of title used in real estate transactions is the more common form 
of abstract an abstract of title lists all the owners of a piece of land a 
house or a building before it came into possession of the present owner the 
abstract also records all deeds wills mortgages and other documents that affect 
ownership of the property an abstract describes a chain of transfers from owner 
to owner and any agreements by former owners that are binding on later owners 
clear title a clear title to property is one that clearly states any obligation 
in the deed to the property it reveals no breaks in the chain of legal 
ownership after the records of the property have been traced and the title has 
been found clear it is sometimes guaranteed or insured in a few states a more 
efficient system of insuring title real properties provides for registration of 
a clear title with public authorities after this is accomplished no abstract of 
title is necessary patent law in the context of patent law and specifically in 
prior art searches searching through abstracts is a common way to find relevant 
prior art document to question to novelty or inventive step or non obviousness 
in united states patent law of an invention references world book encyclopedia 
one nine eight eight see also academic conference external links rule eight pct 
defining the requirements regarding the abstract in an international 
application filed under patent cooperation treaty pct article eight five and 
rule three three epc defining the abstract related requirements in a european 
patent application legal research see also internet troll an aolamer or aol 
lamer is a person using aol that posts flamebait or other off topic messages in 
a newsgroup in order to disrupt the newsgroup during the early one nine nine 
zero s many regular non aol internet newsgroup users routinely killed all 
messages coming from aol as many of the messages coming from aol were non 
informative in addition the term aolamer is often used as a derogatory term for 
aol subscribers by users of other internet service providers who view aol as a 
provider associated with people who know little about computers america online 
internet trolling alan alda as benjamin franklin hawkeye pierce alan alda born 
january two eight one nine three six as alphonso joseph d abruzzo is an 
american actor writer director and sometimes political activist he is most 
famous for his role as hawkeye pierce in the television series m a s h in the 
one nine seven zero s and one nine eight zero s he was viewed as the archetypal 
sensitive male though in recent years he has appeared in roles which counter 
that image family and early life alda was born in new york city his italian 
american father robert alda born alphonso giuseppe giovanni roberto d abruzzo 
was a successful actor and his mother joan brown was crowned miss new york in a 
beauty pageant the adopted surname alda is a contraction of al phonso and d a 
bruzzo when alan alda was growing up his parents divorced alan alda contracted 
polio when he was seven years old which kept him bedridden for two years as he 
received treatments alan alda s half brother anthony alda was christened 
antonio d abruzzo on the nine th of december one nine five six he received his 
bachelor s degree from fordham university in one nine five six during his 
junior year he studied in europe where he acted in a play in rome and performed 
with his father on television in amsterdam after graduation he joined the u s 
army reserve and served a six month tour of duty as a gunnery officer in korea 
following the korean war a year after graduation he married arlene weiss with 
whom he has three daughters eve elizabeth and beatrice arlene alda is a well 
known photographer author and clarinettist raised as a devout catholic he has 
since left the church but continues to celebrate religious holidays and events 
his specific religious beliefs are difficult to define he is also an activist 
for feminist causes and has been for many years acting career fame and m a s h 
alda began his career in the one nine five zero s as a member of the compass 
players comedy revue in the eleven years seven two eight three he starred in m 
a s h he was nominated for two one emmy awards winning five he wrote or co 
wrote twenty episodes and directed thirty episodes when he won his first emmy 
award for writing he was so happy that he performed a cartwheel before running 
up to the stage to accept the award he also was the first person to win emmy 
awards for acting writing and directing for the same series interestingly 
enough the late richard hooker who wrote the novel on which m a s h was based 
did not like alan alda s portrayal of hawkeye pierce hooker had based hawkeye 
on himself though hooker didn t care for the show in general after m a s h alda 
s prominence in the enormously successful m a s h gave him a platform to speak 
out on political topics and he has been a strong and vocal supporter of women s 
rights as such he has been something of a boogeyman for some political social 
conservatives who disagree with his views he has also appeared in at least two 
tv commercials both of these were in the small computer industry first for 
atari and later with the rest of the m a s h cast for ibm s ps two product line 
with microchannel architecture alan alda as senator vinick alan alda has also 
played nobel prize winning physicist richard feynman in the play qed which has 
only one other character although peter parnell wrote the play alda both 
produced and inspired it alda has also appeared frequently in the films of 
woody allen and he has been a guest star five times on er playing dr gabriel 
lawrence as of two zero zero four alda is a regular cast member on the nbc 
program the west wing portraying republican u s senator and presidential 
hopeful arnold vinick he made his premiere in the sixth season s tenth episode 
in the room and was added to the opening credits with the thirteenth episode 
king corn throughout his career he has been nominated for the emmy award three 
one times and the tony award twice and has won seven people s choice awards six 
golden globe awards and three director s guild of america awards however it was 
not until two zero zero four after a long acting career that alda received his 
first nomination for an academy award this was the best supporting actor 
nomination for his role as senator ralph owen brewster in martin scorsese s 
film the aviator in the spring of two zero zero five alda starred as shelly 
levene in the tony award winning broadway revival of david mamet s glengarry 
glen ross for which he received a tony award nomination for best featured actor 
in a play it has become quite normal for alda in his later roles to have some 
reference to his early work in m a s h for instance both the senator he played 
in the aviator and hawkeye pierce came from maine in a line on er his character 
mentions that he uses a surgical technique he picked up in a military hospital 
the same character also undergoes a mental acuity test where he has to identify 
pictures of objects he sees a funnel and identifies it as a martini glass 
without the base hawkeye pierce was very fond of martinis alda s west wing 
character has also made at least one reference to korea when he said i could 
take these people to the dmz and it still wouldn t take their minds off ethanol 
and abortion in two zero zero five alda published his first round of memoirs 
never have your dog stuffed and other things i ve learned published by random 
house isbn one four zero zero zero six four zero nine zero among other stories 
he recalls his intestines becoming strangulated while on location in chile for 
his pbs show scientific american frontiers he also talks about his mother s 
battle with schizophrenia filmography gone are the days one nine six three 
paper lion one nine six eight the extraordinary seaman one nine six nine jenny 
one nine seven zero the moonshine war one nine seven zero the mephisto waltz 
one nine seven one to kill a clown one nine seven two the glass house one nine 
seven two kill me if you can tv one nine seven seven same time next year one 
nine seven eight california suite one nine seven eight the seduction of joe 
tynan one nine seven nine also writer the four seasons movie one nine eight one 
also director and writer sweet liberty one nine eight six also director and 
writer a new life one nine eight eight also director and writer crimes and 
misdemeanors one nine eight nine betsy s wedding one nine nine zero also 
director and writer whispers in the dark one nine nine two manhattan murder 
mystery one nine nine three canadian bacon one nine nine five flirting with 
disaster one nine nine six everyone says i love you one nine nine six murder at 
one six zero zero one nine nine seven mad city one nine nine seven the object 
of my affection one nine nine eight keepers of the frame one nine nine nine 
documentary what women want two zero zero zero the aviator two zero zero four 
external links bio on scientific american frontiers comprehensive bio military 
service geocities fan site page interview with alda on npr s fresh air 
september two one two zero zero five never have your dog stuffed web site daily 
alan alda news one nine three six births actors and actresses appearing on er 
actors and actresses appearing on the west wing american film actors american 
television actors best supporting actor oscar nominee hollywood walk of fame 
italian americans m a s h actors people from new york city roman catholics 
worst supporting actor razzie nominee living people united states army officers 
the ball used in american football has a pointed oval or vesica piscis shape 
and usually has a large set of stitches along one side american football known 
in the united states simply as football is a competitive team sport the object 
of the game is to advance the football towards the opposing team s end zone and 
score points the ball can be advanced by carrying the ball or by throwing or 
handing it from one teammate to the other points can be scored in a variety of 
ways including carrying the ball over the goal line throwing the ball to 
another player past the goal line or kicking it through the goal posts the 
winner is the team with the most points when the time expires outside of the 
united states and a few other countries such as american samoa the sport is 
usually referred to as american football or sometimes as gridiron to 
differentiate it from other football games especially association football 
soccer and rugby football american football evolved as a separate sport from 
rugby football in the late one nine th century arena football is a variant of 
american football in canada the unqualified term football typically refers to 
canadian football a game which is a close relative of american football but 
different in several respects popularity since the one nine six zero s football 
has surpassed baseball as the most popular spectator sport in the united states 
the three two team national football league nfl is the most popular and only 
major professional american football league its championship game the super 
bowl is watched by nearly half of us television households and is also 
televised in over one five zero other countries super bowl sunday has become an 
annual ritual in late january or early february football is also the most 
watched sport on television in the us the nfl also operates a developmental 
league nfl europe with six teams based in european cities a colorado state 
university player runs with the ball as an air force academy player lines up a 
tackle college football is also extremely popular throughout the u s especially 
in markets not served by an nfl team several college football stadiums seat 
more than one zero zero zero zero zero fans which regularly sell out even high 
school football games can attract five figure crowds especially in hotbeds like 
western pennsylvania nebraska florida georgia and most especially texas ohio 
and california the weekly autumn ritual of college and high school football 
which includes marching bands cheerleaders and parties including the ubiquitous 
tailgate party is an important part of the culture in much of smalltown america 
it is a long standing tradition in the united states though not universally 
observed that high school football games are played on friday college games on 
saturday and professional games on sunday with an additional professional game 
on monday nights see monday night football it is often said of an outstanding 
college football player that he is likely to be playing on sundays one day 
meaning that he is a good pro prospect certain fall and winter holidays most 
notably thanksgiving christmas and new years day have traditional football 
games associated with them football is also played recreationally by amateur 
club and youth teams e g the pop warner little league programs there are also 
many semi pro teams in leagues where the players are paid to play but at a 
small enough salary that they generally must also hold a full time job pro 
football is played only in the united states and in the above mentioned nfl 
europe league the sport is popular as an amateur activity in mexico and 
american samoa and to a lesser extent in japan europe and australia a very 
similar sport canadian football is widely played in canada organized football 
is played almost exclusively by men and boys although a few amateur and semi 
professional women s leagues have begun play in recent years the rules of 
american football the object of american football is to score more points than 
the opposing team within a set time limit field and players the numbers on the 
field indicate the number of yards to the nearest end zone the field is often 
called the gridiron because the markings on the field resemble a grill the game 
is played on a rectangular field one two zero yards one one zero metres long by 
five three one three yards four nine metres wide the longer boundary lines are 
sidelines while the shorter boundary lines are end lines near each end of the 
field is a goal line they are one zero zero yards apart a scoring area called 
an end zone extends one zero yards beyond each goal line to each end line yard 
lines cross the field every five yards and are numbered from each goal line to 
the five zero yard line or midfield similar to a typical rugby league field two 
rows of lines known as hash marks parallel the side lines near the middle of 
the field all plays start with the ball on or between the hash marks at the 
back of each end zone are two goal posts also called uprights that are one 
eight five feet apart the posts are connected by a crossbar one zero feet from 
the ground successful kicks must go above the crossbar and between the uprights 
at many fields the uprights and crossbar are attached by a curved bar to a post 
outside the field of play to reduce the chance of players running into the 
supports each team has one one players on the field at a time however teams may 
substitute for any or all of their players between plays as a result players 
have very specialized roles and almost all of the five three players on an nfl 
team will play in any given game thus teams are divided into three separate 
units the offense the defense and the special teams see below in the nfl 
players jersey numbers are distributed according to a strict system e g 
quarterbacks always wear between one one nine game duration a standard football 
game consists of four one five minute typically one two minutes in high school 
football periods called quarters with an intermission called halftime after the 
second quarter the clock stops after certain plays therefore a game can last 
considerably longer often more than three hours in real time if an nfl game is 
tied after four quarters the teams play up to another one five minutes in an 
nfl overtime game the first team that scores wins if neither team scores the 
game is a tie college overtime rules are more complicated and are described at 
overtime sport advancing the ball advancing the ball in american football 
resembles the six tackle rule and the play the ball in rugby league football 
the team that takes possession of the ball the offense has four attempts called 
downs to advance the ball one zero yards towards their opponent s the defense s 
end zone when the offense gains one zero yards it gets a first down or another 
set of four downs to gain one zero yards if the offense fails to gain a first 
down one zero yards after four downs it loses possession of the ball except at 
the beginning of halves and after scores see kickoffs and free kicks below the 
ball is always put into play by a snap all players line up facing each other at 
the line of scrimmage the position on the field where the play begins one 
offensive player the center then passes or snaps the ball between his legs to a 
teammate usually the quarterback players can then advance the ball in two ways 
by running with the ball also known as rushing one ball carrier can hand the 
ball to another this is known as a handoff by throwing the ball to a teammate 
known as passing the forward pass is a key factor distinguishing american and 
canadian football from other football sports the offense can throw the ball 
forward only once on a play and only from behind the line of scrimmage the ball 
can be thrown sideways or backwards at any time this type of pass is known as a 
lateral and is much rarer in american football than in rugby league or rugby 
union where a backwards pass is mandatory a play or down ends and the ball 
becomes dead after any of the following the player with the ball is forced to 
the ground or has his forward progress halted by members of the other team as 
determined by an official a forward pass flies out of bounds or touches the 
ground before it is caught this is known as an incomplete pass the ball is 
returned to the original line of scrimmage for the next down the ball or the 
player with the ball goes beyond the dimensions of the field out of bounds a 
team scores a certain penalty is committed such as false start that causes the 
play to be blown dead and replayed officials blow a whistle to notify all 
players that the play is over at all times players and fans must be aware of 
the sequence of downs and the distance to a new first down when a team has a 
first down the scoreboard or television screen flashes one st and one zero that 
is first down and one zero yards to go if the team gains three yards on the 
first play for example the next down will be two nd and seven changes of 
possession the offense maintains possession of the ball unless one of the 
following things happens the team fails to get a first down that is move the 
ball forward at least one zero yards in four downs the defensive team takes 
over the ball at the spot where the play ends a change of possession in this 
manner is commonly called a turnover on downs the offense scores a touchdown or 
field goal the team that scored then kicks off the ball to the other team see 
scoring and kickoffs below the offense punts the ball to the defense a punt is 
a kick in which a player drops the ball and kicks it before it hits the ground 
punts are nearly always made on fourth down when the offensive team does not 
want to risk giving up the ball to the other team at its current spot on the 
field through a failed attempt to make a first down and feels it is too far 
from the other team s goal posts to kick a field goal a defensive player 
catches a forward pass this is called an interception and the player who makes 
the interception can run with the ball until tackled forced out of bounds or 
scores after the intercepting player is tackled or forced out of bounds his 
team s offensive unit returns to the field and takes over at his last position 
an offensive player drops the ball a fumble and a defensive player picks it up 
as with interceptions a player recovering a fumble can run with the ball until 
tackled or forced out of bounds lost fumbles and interceptions are together 
known as turnovers the offensive team misses a field goal attempt the defensive 
team gets the ball at the spot where the previous play began or in the nfl at 
the spot of the kick if the unsuccessful kick was attempted from within two 
zero yards of the end zone the other team gets the ball at its own two zero 
yard line that is two zero yards from the end zone an offensive player is 
tackled forced out of bounds or commits certain penalties in his own end zone 
this rare occurrence is called a safety see scoring below scoring a team scores 
points by the following plays a touchdown td is worth six points a touchdown is 
scored when a player runs the ball into or catches a pass in his opponent s end 
zone after a touchdown the scoring team attempts a conversion the ball is 
placed at the other team s three yard line the two yard line in the nfl the 
team can attempt to kick it over the crossbar and through the goal posts in the 
manner of a field goal for one point an extra point or run or pass it into the 
end zone in the manner of a touchdown for two points a two point conversion in 
collegiate and professional leagues the extra point is usually preferred its 
success rate is nine four in the nfl and nine three eight in the ncaa compared 
to four three in the nfl and four three five in the ncaa for two point 
conversions if the defense forces a turnover on an attempted conversion and 
runs the ball back to their opponent s endzone they are awarded with two points 
does not apply in the nfl a field goal fg is worth three points and it is 
scored by kicking the ball over the crossbar and through the goal posts field 
goals may be placekicked kicked when the ball is held vertically against the 
ground by a teammate or drop kicked a field goal is usually attempted on fourth 
down instead of a punt when the ball is close to the goal line or when there is 
little or no time left to otherwise score a safety is worth two points a safety 
is scored by the defense when the offensive player in possession of the ball is 
forced back into his own end zone and is tackled there or fumbles the ball out 
of the end zone certain penalties by the offense occurring in the end zone also 
result in a safety kickoffs and free kicks each half begins with a kickoff 
teams also kick off after scoring touchdowns and field goals the ball is kicked 
from a kicking tee which is made from one s own three zero yard line in the nfl 
and from the three five yard line in college football the other team s kick 
returner tries to catch the ball and advance it as far as possible where he is 
stopped is the point where the offense will begin its drive or series of 
offensive plays if a kick returner does not want to run with the ball he has 
the option to signal for a fair catch by waving his hands in the air before the 
catch he will then be allowed to catch the ball and kneel it down on the field 
without being tackled if the kick returner catches the ball in his own end zone 
he can either run with the ball or elect for a touchback by kneeling in the end 
zone the receiving team can then start its offensive drive from its own two 
zero yard line a touchback can also occur when the kick goes out of the end 
zone punts and turnovers in the end zone can also end in touchbacks if a 
kickoff goes out of bounds over the sidelines without being interfered by the 
receiving team the ball will be placed three zero yards from the spot of the 
kickoff traditionally at the receiving team s four zero yard line in the nfl or 
the three five yard line in college football after safeties there is a free 
kick instead of a kickoff a free kick is made from a team s own two zero yard 
line and can be punted or placekicked penalties rule violations are punished 
with penalties most penalties result in moving the football either towards the 
endzone in the case of a defensive penalty or away from the endzone in the case 
of an offensive penalty some defensive penalties give the offense an automatic 
first down in addition if a penalty gives the offensive team enough yardage to 
gain a first down the first down is automatically given if a penalty occurs 
during a play an official throws a yellow flag near the spot of the foul when 
the play is over the team that did not commit the penalty has the option of 
taking either the penalty or the result of the play for example say a defensive 
player commits an offsides penalty on first down by passing the line of 
scrimmage before the snap and the offense gains eight yards on the play the 
team with the ball has the option of taking the penalty and repeat the first 
down with five yards to go or declining the penalty and scrimmaging with two nd 
and two some common penalties false start a player on the offense other than a 
back moving parallel to the line of scrimmage moves just prior to the snap five 
yards offsides a player is on the wrong side of the ball at the start of a play 
five yards similar fouls touching an opponent before the snap is encroachment 
lining up alongside the football instead of behind it is a neutral zone 
infraction holding a blocker unfairly impedes a would be tackler or pass 
receiver by grabbing the player s jersey hooking or tackling when commited by 
the offense or by either team on a change of possession the penalty is ten 
yards when committed by the defense the penalty is five yards and an automatic 
first down is awarded to the offense if the penalty occurred beyond the line of 
scrimmage the penalty would be enforced from the spot of the foul pass 
interference after a pass is launched into the air a defender pushes hooks 
grabs or knocks down a would be pass receiver or if the receiver does the same 
to the defender to prevent an interception first down at the spot of the foul 
if against the defense one five yards from the previous spot in college 
football or ten yards from the previous spot if against the offense similar 
penalties before a pass are called as holding or illegal contact facemask a 
player places his hand on an opponent s facemask during a play five yards or 
fifteen a personal foul if the player hooks his fingers into the facemask or 
pulls on it roughing the passer kicker a player places a hard hit on a passer 
long enough after a pass has been thrown to consider the contact avoidable or 
places a hard hit on a punter or place kicker fifteen yards and automatic first 
down running into the kicker a lighter contact on a kicker especially after the 
kick has been made five yards intentional grounding the passer throws a forward 
pass not near any eligible receiver without first leaving the area behind where 
the blocking linemen were standing before the snap the pocket or the passer 
throws a forward pass outside of the pocket which does not reach the original 
line of scrimmage and is not near any eligible receiver ten yards plus loss of 
down except if the penalty occurred in the end zone then it is ruled a safety 
and the defense is awarded two points in college football and high school 
football the defense is also credited with a quarterback sack note that spiking 
the ball to stop the clock is exempt from this ineligible receiver downfield on 
every play the offense must have seven players on the line of scrimmage the 
player furthest from the ball on each side are eligible receivers the interior 
five players are considered ineligible to receive passes this penalty is called 
if one of the five interior players is more than five yards past the line of 
scrimmage during a forward pass dead ball personal foul after the play is blown 
dead a player tackles or makes rough contact with a player on the other team 
fifteen yards automatic first down if on defense unnecessary roughness a catch 
all for rough play that doesn t merit its own foul an example is an avoidable 
late hit on a ball carrier who has run out of bounds fifteen yards 
unsportsmanlike conduct another catch all call commonly used for taunting 
excessive celebration after a touchdown and certain banned forms of pantomime 
like slashing the throat fifteen yards the players as noted above most football 
players have highly specialized roles at the college and nfl levels most play 
only offense or only defense offense the offensive line consists of five 
players whose job is to protect the passer and clear the way for runners by 
blocking members of the defense except for the center offensive linemen 
generally do not handle the ball the quarterback receives the ball on most 
plays he then hands or tosses it to a running back throws it to a receiver or 
runs with it himself running backs line up behind or beside the qb and 
specialize in rushing with the ball they also block catch passes and on rare 
occasions pass the ball to others wide receivers line up near the sidelines 
they specialize in catching passes tight ends line up outside the offensive 
line they can either play like wide receivers try to catch passes or like 
offensive linemen protect the qb or create spaces for runners not all of these 
types of players will be in on every offensive play teams can vary the number 
of wide receivers tight ends and running backs on the field at one time defense 
the defensive line consists of three to five players who line up across from 
the offensive line they try to tackle the running backs before they can gain 
yardage or the quarterback before he can throw a pass at least three players 
line up as defensive backs they cover the receivers and try to stop pass 
completions they occasionally rush the quarterback the other players on the 
defense are known as linebackers they line up between the defensive line and 
backs and may either rush the quarterback or cover potential receivers special 
teams the units of players who handle kicking plays are known as special teams 
special teams feature players that include the punter who handles punts and the 
placekicker or kicker who kicks off and attempts field goals and extra points 
basic football strategy to many fans the chief draw of football is the chess 
game that goes on between the two coaching staffs each team has a playbook of 
dozens to hundreds of plays plays are the directions for what the players 
should do on a down some plays are very safe they are very likely to get a few 
yards but not much more than that other plays have the potential for long gains 
but a greater risk of a loss of yardage or a turnover generally speaking 
rushing plays are less risky than passing plays however there are relatively 
safe passing plays and risky running plays to fool the other team there are 
passing plays designed to look like running plays and vice versa there are many 
trick or gadget plays such as when a team lines up like it is going to kick and 
then tries to run or pass for a first down such high risk plays are a great 
thrill to the fans when they work however they can spell disaster if the 
opposing team realizes the deception and acts accordingly it has been said that 
football is the closest sport that strategically resembles real war which may 
explain why it is by far the most popular sport in the american military in 
fact the united states military academy the united states naval academy and the 
united states air force academy each field football teams that participate in 
division i a of the ncaa army and navy have a particularly historic rivalry a 
physical game american football is a collision sport to stop the offense from 
advancing the ball the defense must tackle the player with the ball by knocking 
him down as such defensive players must use some form of physical contact to 
bring the ball carrier to the ground within certain rules and guidelines 
tacklers cannot kick punch or trip the runner they also cannot grab the face 
mask of the runner s helmet lead into a tackle with their own helmet or lift 
the ball carrier up off his feet and drop him despite these and other rules 
regarding unnecessary roughness most other forms of tackling are legal blockers 
and defenders trying to evade them also have wide leeway in trying to force 
their opponents out of the way quarterbacks are regularly hit by defenders 
coming on full speed from outside the quarterback s field of vision the high 
level of physical contact in football makes it more dangerous than other major 
american team sports to compensate for this players must wear a good deal of 
special protective equipment such as a padded plastic helmet shoulder pads hip 
pads and knee pads these protective paddings were introduced decades ago and 
improved ever since to help minimize lasting injury to players despite 
protective equipment and rule changes to emphasize safety injuries remain very 
common in football due to its physical nature twenty five football players 
mostly high schoolers died from injuries directly related to football from two 
zero zero zero two zero zero four according to the national center for 
catastrophic sport injury research concussions are common with an estimated six 
two zero zero zero suffered every year among high school players according to 
the brain injury association of arizona it is common to see injuries in the 
game and deaths are not unheard of the game is particularly risky when played 
by amateurs without proper gear such as is common amongst americans in 
backyards and parks across the country some have criticized american football 
as a violent sport american football is indeed quite physical in comparison to 
sports like basketball and soccer as well as other major american team sports 
tackle football is often banned in american schoolyards in favor of touch 
football which uses two hand touching instead of tackling or flag football in 
which a player is tackled when an opponent pulls a flag off a belt attached to 
the player s waist school physical education classes often use the two hand 
touch version of the game leaving the tackles to the school s official after 
school sports program which can provide the appropriate gear and supervision 
the level of physical aggression and risk of injury has also made football less 
appealing to females as they generally lack the muscle and body mass to compete 
without serious risk the tackle nature of football also tends to favor the 
largest and strongest players along with the fastest the average weight of 
players in the nfl has increased in recent years all these factors have brought 
the sport into controversy in the past few decades joining the group of other 
violent and thus controversial sports such as dodgeball wrestling hockey and 
boxing critics argue that these sports emphasize size physical strength and 
brute force and breed aggression and unhealthy competitive attitudes in 
children others argue that such sports teach sportsmanship and teamwork and 
though contact sports are all violent to some degree they always emphasize 
skill and strategy over mere belligerence development of the game both american 
football and soccer have their origins in varieties of football played in the 
united kingdom in the mid one nine th century and american football is directly 
descended from rugby football rugby was first introduced to north america in 
canada brought by the british army garrison in montreal which played a series 
of games with mcgill university both canadian and american football evolved 
from this point for an in depth overview of the differences and similarities of 
canadian football and american football see comparison of canadian and american 
football american colleges spearheaded the growth of football the first inter 
collegiate football game was played between rutgers and princeton universities 
on november six one eight six nine the game was won by rutgers six four 
although the game which bore little resemblance to its modern day counterpart 
was played with two teams of two five men each under rugby like rules but like 
modern football it was replete with surprise strategy prodigies of 
determination and physical prowess to use the words of one of the rutgers 
players rutgers football american football in its current form grew out of a 
series of three games between harvard university and mcgill university of 
montreal in one eight seven four mcgill played rugby football while harvard 
played the boston game which was closer to soccer as often happened in those 
days of far from universal rules the teams alternated rules so that both would 
have a fair chance the harvard players liked having the opportunity to run with 
the ball and in one eight seven five persuaded yale university to adopt rugby 
rules for their annual game in one eight seven six yale harvard princeton and 
columbia formed the intercollegiate football association which used the rugby 
code except for a slight difference in scoring in one eight eight zero walter 
camp introduced the scrimmage in place of the rugby scrum in one eight eight 
two the system of downs was introduced to thwart princeton s and yale s 
strategy of controlling the ball without trying to score in one eight eight 
three the number of players was reduced at camp s urging to eleven and camp 
introduced the soon standard arrangement of a seven man offensive line with a 
quarterback two halfbacks and a fullback on september three one eight nine five 
the first professional football game was played in latrobe pennsylvania between 
the latrobe ymca and the jeannette athletic club latrobe won the contest one 
two zero by the one eight nine zero s interlocking offensive formations such as 
the flying wedge and the practice of teammates physically dragging ball 
carrying players forward had made the game extremely dangerous despite 
restrictions on the flying wedge and other precautions in one nine zero five 
eighteen players were killed in games president theodore roosevelt informed the 
universities that the game must be made safer to force them to respond to his 
concerns he threatened to pressure congress to make playing football a federal 
crime in one nine zero six two rival organizing bodies the intercollegiate 
rules committee and the intercollegiate athletic association met in new york 
eventually they agreed on several new rules intended to make the game safer 
among them the addition of a neutral zone between the scrimmage lines and a 
requirement that at least six players from each team line up on them the most 
far reaching innovation they considered though was the legalization of the 
forward pass this was very controversial at the time much derided by purists as 
an alternative means of opening out the play walter camp would have preferred 
widening the field but representatives from harvard pointed to recently 
constructed harvard stadium which could not be widened and the forward pass was 
adopted it has come to shape the whole history of american football as opposed 
to its cousins around the world in one nine one zero after further deaths 
interlocking formations were finally outlawed and in one nine one two the field 
was changed to its current size the value of a touchdown increased to six 
points and a fourth down added to each possession the game had achieved its 
modern form problems in football injuries are more common in american football 
than in many other sports although rule changes made in the past nine zero 
years for instance the elimination of horse collar tackles have gradually 
lowered the rates of injuries in addition protective equipment has become 
better for example the optional leather helmets introduced during the one eight 
nine zero s have been replaced in several stages by required high tech padded 
plastic helmets with bars protecting the face more recently the use of steroids 
and the extent thereof has become an object of debate in professional college 
and even high school football leagues another problem with football is that it 
is an expensive sport the specialized helmets uniforms and pads can cost 
hundreds of dollars there is a widespread perception that football teams based 
in schools and public recreational leagues consume far more than their fair 
share of the sports budget although sales of tickets to college and to some 
extent high school football games often make it a revenue producing sport 
cleveland browns stadium in cleveland ohio home of the cleveland browns 
professional college and other leagues football is played at a number of levels 
in the united states these include the following national football league nfl 
the top level men s professional league nfl europe semi professional league in 
europe college football played at many u s colleges american football 
association national organization for the advancement and promotion of semi pro 
minor league football teams and leagues in the united states north american 
football league amateur minor league with more than one zero zero member 
organizations since one nine nine six women s american football since two zero 
zero zero there has been a surge of women s professional leagues high school 
football played at most u s high schools pop warner or youth football involves 
younger children who are too young to play high school generally in middle 
school sprint football players must weigh no more than one seven two pounds 
american football is also played in many nations around the world some of the 
organizations leagues that play american football are mexican college football 
league or onefa played by many mexican colleges with essentially ncaa rules 
british collegiate american football league bcafl fast growing college football 
league in the uk british american football league bafl higher league of 
american football in the uk european federation of american football www efaf 
info european organization that crowns its champion in the euro bowl german 
football league gridiron australia national body of several state level leagues 
international federation of american football international governing body for 
american football with three nine member associations from north america europe 
asia and oceania the ifaf also overseas the world championship of american 
football okinawan football league various football teams made up of u s 
servicemembers and one from ryuku university other kinds of football with quite 
different rules canadian football league cfl men s professional league based in 
canada played using different rules known as canadian football arena football 
league mid level men s professional league played in indoor stadiums hence the 
name arena football one of the nation s fastest growing sports nine man 
football eight man football and six man football variations of high school 
football usually played in sparsely populated areas amateur and youth league 
football flag football and touch football non tackle almost exclusively amateur 
the descriptions in this article are based primarily on the current rules of 
the national football league nfl one nine two zero present differences with 
college rules will be noted professional college high school and amateur rules 
are similar professional leagues that no longer exist world football league wfl 
one nine seven four seven five united states football league usfl one nine 
eight three one nine eight five xfl xfl two zero zero one all america football 
conference aafc one nine four six one nine four nine two teams are now in the 
nfl world league of american football wlaf one nine nine one one nine nine 
three now nfl europe american football leagues afl four separate ones i one 
nine two six ii one nine three seven three eight iii one nine four zero one 
nine four one and iv one nine six zero one nine six nine the fourth afl one 
nine six zero one nine six nine merged with the nfl in one nine seven zero and 
now exists mostly as the afc with several new teams the old nfl appeared as the 
nfc fore more information list of leagues of american football references see 
also american football strategy national women s football association canadian 
football league german football league american football glossary list of 
american football players pro football hall of fame list of defunct sports 
leagues fantasy football gridiron football external links the national football 
league nfl the top professional league nfl players association ncaa playing 
rules complete college football rules are available as a pdf file american 
football coaches association movie of one nine zero three football game between 
the university of chicago and the university of michigan chronology of many 
events in the nfl the women s league annual survey of football injury research 
football basics football faq football plays drills fundamentals resource for 
coaches players american football team sports the american revolutionary war 
one seven seven five one seven eight three also known as the american war of 
independence was the military component of the american revolution it was 
fought primarily between great britain and revolutionaries within thirteen 
british colonies in north america who proclaimed themselves as the united 
states of america early in the war the war began largely as a colonial revolt 
against the economic policies of the british empire and eventually widened far 
beyond british north america with france spain and the netherlands entering the 
war against great britain additionally many native americans fought on both 
sides of the conflict throughout the war the british were able to use their 
naval superiority to capture and occupy coastal cities but control of the 
countryside where most of the population lived largely eluded them french 
involvement proved decisive with a naval victory in the chesapeake leading to 
the surrender of a british army at the battle of yorktown in one seven eight 
one the treaty of paris in one seven eight three recognized the independence of 
the united states of america the terms american revolutionary war and american 
revolution are often used interchangeably though the american revolution 
included political and social developments before and after the war itself this 
article refers solely to the military campaign for a broader perspective 
including the origins and aftermath of the war see the article on the american 
revolution combatants choosing sides colonists were divided over which side to 
support in the war in some areas the struggle was a civil war the 
revolutionaries also known as americans or patriots had the support of about 
four zero to four five percent of the colonial population about one five to two 
zero percent of the population supported the british crown during the war and 
were known as loyalists or tories loyalists fielded perhaps five zero zero zero 
zero men during the war years in support of the british empire after the war 
some seven zero zero zero zero loyalists departed most going to canada great 
britain or to british colonies in the caribbean when the war began the 
americans did not have a professional army also known as a standing army each 
colony had traditionally provided for its own defenses through the use of local 
militia militiamen served for only a few weeks or months at a time were 
generally reluctant to go very far from home and would often come and go as 
they saw fit militia typically lacked the training and discipline of regular 
troops but could be effective when an emergency energized them seeking to 
coordinate military efforts the continental congress established on paper a 
regular army the continental army in june one seven seven five and appointed 
george washington as commander in chief the development of the continental army 
was always a work in progress and washington reluctantly augmented the regular 
troops with militia throughout the war although as many as two five zero zero 
zero zero men may have served as regulars or as militiamen for the 
revolutionary cause in the eight years of the war there were never more than 
nine zero zero zero zero total men under arms for the americans in any given 
year armies in north america were small by european standards of the era the 
greatest number of men that washington personally commanded in the field at any 
one time was fewer than one seven zero zero zero european nations german troops 
serving with the british in north america c ziegler after conrad gessner one 
seven nine nine early in one seven seven five the british army consisted of 
about three six zero zero zero men worldwide but wartime recruitment steadily 
increased this number additionally over the course of the war the british hired 
about three zero zero zero zero german mercenaries popularly known in the 
colonies as hessians because many of them came from hesse kassel germans would 
make up about one third of the british troop strength in north america by one 
seven seven nine the number of british and german troops stationed in north 
america was over six zero zero zero zero though these were spread from canada 
to florida france the netherlands and spain entered the war against great 
britain in an attempt to dilute britain s emerging superpower status early on 
all three countries quietly provided financial assistance to the american 
rebels france officially entered the war in one seven seven eight and soon sent 
troops ships and military equipment to fight against the british for the 
remainder of the war spain entered the war in one seven seven nine officially 
as an ally of france but not the united states spain was not keen on 
encouraging similar rebellions in her own empire the netherlands entered the 
war late in one seven eight zero but was soon overwhelmed by the british blacks 
and native americans african americans slaves and free blacks served on both 
sides during the war black soldiers served in northern militias from the outset 
but this was forbidden in the south where slaveowners feared arming slaves lord 
dunmore the royal governor of virginia issued an emancipation proclamation in 
november one seven seven five promising freedom to runaway slaves who fought 
for the british sir henry clinton issued a similar edict in new york in one 
seven seven nine tens of thousands of slaves escaped to the british lines 
although possibly as few as one zero zero zero served under arms many of the 
rest served as orderlies mechanics laborers servants scouts and guides although 
more than half died in smallpox epidemics that swept the british forces and a 
number were driven out of the british lines when food ran low despite dunmore s 
promises the majority were not given their freedom in response and because of 
manpower shortages washington lifted the ban on black enlistment in the 
continental army in january one seven seven six all black units were formed in 
rhode island and massachusetts many were slaves promised freedom for serving in 
lieu of their masters another all black unit came from haiti with french forces 
at least five zero zero zero black soldiers fought for the patriot cause most 
american indian communities east of the mississippi river were affected by the 
war many divided over the question of which side to support most native 
americans who joined the fight fought against the united states since native 
lands were threatened by expanding american settlement an estimated one three 
zero zero zero warriors fought on the british side the largest group the 
iroquois confederacy fielded about one five zero zero warriors against the 
americans war in the north massachusetts one seven seven four to one seven 
seven six map of campaigns in the revolutionary war in one seven seven four the 
british parliament effectively abolished the provincial government of 
massachusetts lieutenant general thomas gage already the commander in chief of 
british troops in north america was also appointed governor of massachusetts 
and was instructed by king george s government to enforce royal authority in 
the troublesome colony however popular resistance compelled the newly appointed 
royal officials in massachusetts to resign or to seek refuge in boston gage 
commanded four regiments of british regulars about four zero zero zero men from 
his headquarters in boston but the countryside was in the hands of the 
revolutionaries on the night of april one eight one seven seven five general 
gage sent nine zero zero men to seize munitions stored by the colonial militia 
at concord massachusetts several riders including paul revere alerted the 
countryside and when the british troops entered lexington on the morning of 
april one nine they found seven five minutemen formed up on the village common 
shots were exchanged and the british moved on to concord where there was more 
fighting by the time the redcoats as the british soldiers were called began the 
return march several thousand militiamen had gathered along the road a running 
fight ensued and the british detachment suffered heavily with the battle of 
lexington and concord the shot heard round the world the war had begun 
afterwards thousands of militiamen converged on boston bottling up the british 
in the city late in may gage received by sea about four five zero zero 
reinforcements and a trio of generals who would play a vital role in the war 
william howe john burgoyne and henry clinton they formulated a plan to break 
out of the city on june one seven one seven seven five british forces under 
general howe seized the charleston peninsula at the battle of bunker hill the 
battle was technically a british victory but losses were so heavy that the 
attack was not followed up thus the siege was not broken and general gage was 
soon replaced by general howe as the british commander in chief in july one 
seven seven five newly appointed general washington arrived outside boston to 
take charge of the colonial forces the standoff continued throughout the fall 
and winter in early march one seven seven six heavy cannons that had been 
captured by the revolutionaries at fort ticonderoga were moved to boston a 
difficult feat engineered by henry knox when the guns were placed on dorchester 
heights overlooking the british positions howe s situation became untenable the 
british evacuated the city on march one seven one seven seven six and sailed 
for temporary refuge in halifax nova scotia the local militia dispersed and in 
april washington took most of the continental army to fortify new york city 
canada one seven seven five to one seven seven six during the long standoff at 
boston the continental congress sought a way to seize the initiative elsewhere 
congress had initially invited french canadians to join them as the fourteenth 
colony but when that failed to happen an invasion of canada was authorized in 
an attempt to drive the british from the primarily francophone colony of quebec 
comprising present day quebec and ontario two expeditions were undertaken on 
september one six one seven seven five brigadier general richard montgomery 
marched north from fort ticonderoga with about one seven zero zero militiamen 
capturing montreal on november one three general guy carleton the governor of 
canada escaped to quebec city the second expedition led by colonel benedict 
arnold set out from fort western present day maine on september two five the 
expedition was a logistical nightmare and many men succumbed to smallpox by the 
time arnold reached quebec city in early november he had but six zero zero of 
his original one one zero zero men nevertheless arnold demanded the surrender 
of the city to no avail montgomery joined arnold and they attacked quebec city 
on december three one but were soundly defeated by carleton montgomery was 
killed arnold was wounded and many men were taken prisoner the americans held 
on outside quebec city until the spring of one seven seven six and then 
withdrew another attempt was made by the revolutionaries to push back towards 
quebec but failed at trois rivi res on june eight one seven seven six carleton 
then launched his own invasion and defeated arnold in the battle of valcour 
island in october arnold fell back to fort ticonderoga where the invasion of 
canada had begun the invasion of canada ended as an embarrassing disaster for 
the revolutionaries but arnold s improvised navy on lake champlain delayed the 
fateful british counter thrust the saratoga campaign until one seven seven 
seven new york and new jersey one seven seven six to one seven seven seven 
having withdrawn from boston the british now focused on capturing new york city 
general howe with the services of his brother admiral lord howe began amassing 
troops on staten island in july one seven seven six general washington with a 
smaller army of about two zero zero zero zero men unwittingly violated a 
cardinal rule of warfare and divided his troops about equally between long 
island and manhattan thus allowing the howes to engage only one half of the 
continental army at a time in late august the howes transported about two two 
zero zero zero men including nine zero zero zero hessians to long island in the 
battle of long island on august two seven one seven seven six the british 
expertly executed a surprise flanking maneuver driving the revolutionaries back 
to the brooklyn heights fortifications general howe then laid siege to the 
works but washington skillfully managed a nighttime evacuation to manhattan 
having taken long island the howes moved to seize manhattan on september one 
five general howe landed about one two zero zero zero men on lower manhattan 
quickly taking control of new york city the revolutionaries withdrew to harlem 
heights where they skirmished the next day but held their ground when howe 
moved to encircle washington s army in october the revolutionaries again fell 
back and a battle at white plains was fought on october two eight one seven 
seven six once more washington retreated but howe instead of aggressively 
pursuing the withdrawal returned to manhattan and captured fort washington in 
mid november taking almost three zero zero zero prisoners four days later fort 
lee across the hudson river from fort washington was also taken emanuel leutze 
s one eight five one painting washington crossing the delaware is an iconic 
image of american history general lord cornwallis continued to chase washington 
s army through new jersey until the revolutionaries withdrew across the 
delaware river into pennsylvania in early december with the campaign at an 
apparent conclusion for the season the british entered winter quarters although 
howe had missed several opportunities to crush the diminishing rebel army he 
had killed or captured over five zero zero zero americans he controlled much of 
new york and new jersey and was in a good position to resume operations in the 
spring with the rebel capital of philadelphia in striking distance the outlook 
of the continental army and thus the revolution itself was bleak these are the 
times that try men s souls wrote thomas paine who was with the army on the 
retreat the army had dwindled to fewer than five zero zero zero men fit for 
duty and would be reduced to one four zero zero after enlistments expired at 
the end of the year spirits were low popular support was wavering and congress 
had abandoned philadelphia in despair washington reacted by taking the 
offensive stealthily crossing the delaware on christmas night and capturing 
nearly one zero zero zero hessians at the battle of trenton on december two six 
one seven seven six cornwallis marched to retake trenton but was outmaneuvered 
by washington who successfully attacked the british rearguard at princeton on 
january three one seven seven seven washington then entered winter quarters at 
morristown new jersey having retaken much of new jersey and having secured two 
bold morale boosting victories in quick succession to reinvigorate the flagging 
revolution saratoga campaign one seven seven seven in the summer of one seven 
seven seven the british launched a new expedition from canada led by general 
burgoyne the intention was to seize the lake champlain and hudson river 
corridor effectively isolating new england from the rest of the american 
colonies burgoyne s invasion had two components he would lead about one zero 
zero zero zero men along lake champlain towards albany new york while a second 
column of about two zero zero zero men led by barry st leger would move down 
the mohawk river valley and link up with burgoyne in albany burgoyne set off in 
early july recapturing fort ticonderoga from the retreating revolutionaries 
without firing a shot he then proceeded overland towards albany but 
revolutionaries slowed his progress through the wilderness by destroying 
bridges and felling trees in his path running short on supplies in august 
burgoyne sent a detachment to raid nearby bennington vermont the raiders were 
decisively defeated by local militia depriving burgoyne of nearly one zero zero 
zero men and the much needed supplies the mohawk leader joseph brant commanded 
both american indians and white loyalists during the american revolutionary war 
meanwhile st leger half of his force american indians led by joseph brant had 
laid siege to fort stanwix on the mohawk river about eight zero zero 
revolutionary militiamen and their indian allies marched to relieve the siege 
but were ambushed and scattered by british and indians on august six at the 
battle of oriskany iroquois warriors fought on both sides of the battle marking 
the beginning of a civil war within the six nations when a second relief 
expedition approached this time led by benedict arnold the siege was lifted and 
st leger s expedition returned to canada burgoyne was on his own burgoyne 
pushed on towards albany his forces now reduced to about six zero zero zero men 
a revolutionary army of about eight zero zero zero men commanded by the newly 
arrived general horatio gates had entrenched about one zero miles one six km 
south of saratoga new york burgoyne sent two zero zero zero men to outflank the 
revolutionary position but was checked by generals benedict arnold and daniel 
morgan in the first battle of saratoga on september one nine one seven seven 
seven after the battle the two armies dug in burgoyne was in trouble now but he 
hoped that help from the south might be on the way all along burgoyne had 
suggested that his invasion from canada might be supported by a british 
offensive up the hudson river from howe s location in new york city however 
british war planners did not coordinate their efforts general howe had instead 
sailed away from new york on an expedition to capture philadelphia see next 
section british general henry clinton left in command at new york did indeed 
sail up the hudson in october capturing several forts and burning kingston then 
the rebel capital of new york but his efforts were not enough to affect the 
events at saratoga revolutionary militiamen many of them outraged by the 
reported murder of an american woman at the hands of burgoyne s indian allies 
flocked to gates s army swelling his force to one one zero zero zero by the 
beginning of october burgoyne his position becoming desperate launched a new 
offensive the second battle of saratoga on october seven the attack was 
repelled and general arnold though relieved of command by gates rushed to the 
battle and led a decisive counterattack badly beaten burgoyne surrendered on 
october one seven saratoga is often regarded as the turning point of the war 
revolutionary confidence and determination suffering from howe s successful 
occupation of philadelphia was renewed even more importantly the victory 
encouraged france to enter the war against great britain spain and the 
netherlands soon did the same for the british the war had now become much more 
complicated philadelphia campaign one seven seven seven to one seven seven 
eight having secured new york city in his one seven seven six campaign in one 
seven seven seven general howe concentrated on capturing philadelphia the seat 
of the revolutionary government he moved slowly landing one five zero zero zero 
troops in late august at the northern end of chesapeake bay about five five 
miles nine zero km southwest of philadelphia washington positioned his one one 
zero zero zero men between howe and philadelphia but was outflanked and driven 
back at the battle of brandywine on september one one one seven seven seven the 
continental congress once again abandoned the city british and revolutionary 
forces maneuvered around each other for the next several days clashing in minor 
encounters such as the so called paoli massacre on september two six howe 
finally outmaneuvered washington and marched into philadelphia unopposed after 
taking the city the british garrisoned about nine zero zero zero troops in 
germantown five miles eight km above philadelphia washington unsuccessfully 
attacked germantown in early october and then retreated to watch and wait 
meanwhile the british secured the delaware river by taking with difficulty 
forts mifflin and mercer in november general washington s problems at this time 
were not just with the british in the so called conway cabal some politicians 
and officers unhappy with washington s recent performance as commander in chief 
secretively discussed his removal washington offended by the behind the scenes 
maneuvering laid the whole matter openly before congress his supporters rallied 
behind him and the episode abated washington and his army encamped at valley 
forge in december one seven seven seven about two zero miles three two km from 
philadelphia where they would stay for the next six months over the winter two 
five zero zero men out of one zero zero zero zero died from disease and 
exposure however the army eventually emerged from valley forge in good order 
thanks in part to a training program supervised by baron von steuben meanwhile 
there was a shakeup in the british command with general clinton replacing howe 
as commander in chief french entry into the war had changed british war 
strategy and clinton was ordered by the government to abandon philadelphia and 
defend new york city now vulnerable to french naval power washington s army 
shadowed clinton on his withdrawal and forced a battle at monmouth on june two 
eight one seven seven eight the last major battle in the north washington s 
second in command general charles lee ordered a controversial retreat during 
the battle allowing clinton s army to escape by july clinton was in new york 
city and washington was again at white plains both armies were back where they 
had been two years earlier with the exception of scattered minor actions in the 
north like the battle of stony point the focus of the war now shifted elsewhere 
war in the west main article frontier warfare during the american revolution 
george rogers clark s one eight zero mile two nine zero km trek in the dead of 
winter led to the capture of general henry hamilton lieutenant governor of 
canada west of the appalachian mountains the american revolutionary war was an 
indian war the british and the continental congress both courted american 
indians as allies or urged them to remain neutral and many native american 
communities became divided over what path to take like the iroquois confederacy 
tribes such as the cherokees and the shawnees split into factions delawares 
under white eyes signed the first american indian treaty with the united states 
but other delawares joined the british the british supplied their indian allies 
from forts along the great lakes and tribesmen staged raids on revolutionary 
settlements in new york kentucky pennsylvania and elsewhere joint iroquois 
loyalist attacks in the wyoming valley and at cherry valley in one seven seven 
eight helped provoke the scorched earth sullivan expedition into western new 
york during the summer of one seven seven nine on the western front every man 
woman and child regardless of race was a potential casualty in the ohio country 
the virginia frontiersman george rogers clark attempted to neutralize british 
influence among the ohio tribes by capturing the outposts of kaskaskia and 
vincennes in the summer of one seven seven eight when general henry hamilton 
the british commander at detroit retook vincennes clark returned in a surprise 
march in february one seven seven nine and captured hamilton himself however a 
decisive victory in the west eluded the united states even as their fortunes 
had risen in the east the low point on the frontier came in one seven eight two 
with the gnadenhutten massacre when pennsylvania militiamen unable to track 
down enemy warriors executed nearly one zero zero christian delaware 
noncombatants mostly women and children later that year in the last major 
encounter of the war a party of kentuckians was soundly defeated by a superior 
force of british regulars and native americans war in the south during the 
first three years of the american revolutionary war the primary military 
encounters were in the north one notable exception was in june one seven seven 
six when general henry clinton sailed south to attack charleston south carolina 
this ended in humiliating defeat for the british and the patriots remained in 
control of the southern states for the next three years starting in one seven 
seven eight the british once again turned their attention to georgia south 
carolina north carolina and virginia where they hoped to regain control by 
recruiting thousands of loyalists on december two nine one seven seven eight an 
expeditionary corps of three five zero zero men from clinton s army in new york 
captured savannah georgia an attempt by french and revolutionary forces to 
retake savannah failed on october nine one seven seven nine in this assault 
count casimir pulaski the polish commander of american revolutionary cavalry 
was mortally wounded with savannah secured clinton could now launch a new 
assault on charleston south carolina where he had failed in one seven seven six 
carolinas one seven eight zero to one seven eight one the young and dashing 
banastre tarleton was perhaps the best cavalry commander in the war and the 
most hated man in the south this portrait was painted by sir joshua reynolds in 
one seven eight two clinton finally moved against charleston in one seven eight 
zero blockading the harbor in march and building up about one zero zero zero 
zero troops in the area inside the city general benjamin lincoln commanded 
about two six five zero continentals and two five zero zero militiamen when 
british colonel banastre tarleton cut off the city s supply lines in victories 
at monck s corner in april and lenud s ferry in early may charleston was 
surrounded on may one two one seven eight zero general lincoln surrendered his 
five zero zero zero men the largest surrender of u s troops until the american 
civil war with relatively few casualties clinton had seized the south s biggest 
city and seaport winning perhaps the greatest british victory of the war and 
paving the way for what seemed like certain conquest of the south the remnants 
of the southern continental army began to withdraw to north carolina but were 
pursued by colonel tarleton who defeated them at the battle of waxhaws on may 
two nine one seven eight zero among the americans a story spread that tarleton 
had massacred many americans after they had surrendered the truth of this 
charge is still debated bloody tarleton became a hated name and tarleton s 
quarter referring to his reputed lack of mercy or quarter soon became a 
rallying cry with these events organized american military activity in the 
south had collapsed the states however carried on their functions and the war 
was carried on by partisans such as francis marion general clinton turned over 
british operations in the south to lord cornwallis the continental congress 
dispatched general horatio gates to the rescue with a new army but gates 
promptly suffered one of the worst defeats in u s military history at the 
battle of camden on august one six one seven eight zero setting the stage for 
cornwallis to invade north carolina the tables were quickly turned on 
cornwallis however one wing of his army was utterly defeated at the battle of 
kings mountain on october seven one seven eight zero delaying his move into 
north carolina kings mountain was noteworthy because it was not a battle 
between british redcoats and colonial troops it was a battle between american 
loyalists and american patriots the british plan to raise large loyalist armies 
failed not enough loyalists enlisted and those who did were at risk once the 
british army moved on only in georgia did the crown manage to create a counter 
revolutionary civil government gates was replaced by george washington s most 
dependable subordinate general nathanael greene greene assigned about one zero 
zero zero men to general daniel morgan a superb tactician who crushed tarleton 
s troops at the battle of cowpens on january one seven one seven eight one 
greene proceeded to wear down his opponents in a series of battles guilford 
court house hobkirk s hill ninety six and eutaw springs each of them tactically 
a victory for the british but giving no strategic advantage to the victors 
greene summed up his approach in a motto that would become famous we fight get 
beat rise and fight again unable to capture or destroy greene s army cornwallis 
moved north to to virginia virginia one seven seven five to one seven eight one 
virginia had been under revolutionary control since loyalist forces including 
runaway slaves under governor dunmore had been defeated at the battle of great 
bridge on december nine one seven seven five after the defeat dunmore and his 
troops took refuge on british ships off of norfolk which dunmore bombarded and 
burned on january one one seven seven six he was driven from an island in 
chesapeake bay that summer never to return british forces raided virginia 
sporadically during the war in january one seven eight one the rebel capital of 
richmond was put to the torch by none other than benedict arnold now a turncoat 
who had sold his services to the other side and was now a british general in 
march one seven eight one general washington dispatched lafayette to defend 
virginia the young frenchman had three two zero zero men at his command but 
british troops in the state now reinforced and commanded by cornwallis totaled 
seven two zero zero lafayette skirmished with cornwallis avoiding a decisive 
battle while gathering reinforcements the boy cannot escape me cornwallis is 
supposed to have said however cornwallis was unable to trap lafayette and so he 
moved his forces to yorktown virginia in july in order to link up with the 
british navy war at sea main article naval operations in the american 
revolutionary war meanwhile the co operation of the french became active in 
july count rochambeau arrived at newport rhode island that place had been 
occupied by the british from one seven seven six to the close of one seven 
seven nine an unsuccessful attempt was made to drive them out in one seven 
seven eight by the revolutionaries assisted by the french admiral d estaing and 
a french corps first battle of ushant july two seven one seven seven eight john 
paul jones continental navy battle of cape st vincent one seven eight zero 
second battle of ushant december one two one seven eight one gulf coast after 
spain declared war against great britain in june of one seven seven nine count 
bernardo de g lvez the spanish governor of louisiana seized three british 
mississippi river outposts manchac baton rouge and natchez g lvez then captured 
mobile on march one four one seven eight zero and in may of one seven eight one 
forced the surrender of the british outpost at pensacola florida on may eight 
one seven eight two g lvez captured the british naval base at new providence in 
the bahamas galvez also supplied soldiers to george rogers clark and had been 
supplying substantial quantities of war supplies to the american rebels from as 
early as one seven seven seven caribbean the battle of the saintes took place 
in one seven eight two during the american war of independence and was a 
victory of a british fleet under admiral sir george rodney over a french fleet 
under the comte de grasse the defeat dashed the hopes of france and spain to 
take jamaica and other colonies from the british india the franco british war 
spilled over into india in one seven eight zero in the form of the second anglo 
mysore war the two chief combatants were tipu sultan ruler of the kingdom of 
mysore and a key french ally and the british government of madras the anglo 
mysore conflict was bloody but inconclusive and ended in a draw at the treaty 
of mangalore in one seven eight four netherlands also in one seven eight zero 
the british struck against the united provinces of the netherlands in the 
fourth anglo dutch war to preempt dutch involvement in the league of armed 
neutrality directed primarily against the british navy during the war agitation 
by dutch radicals and a friendly attitude towards the united states by the 
dutch government both influenced by the american revolution also encouraged the 
british to attack the war lasted into one seven eight four and was disastrous 
to the dutch mercantile economy mediterranean on february five one seven eight 
two spanish and french forces captured minorca which had been under british 
control since the treaty of utrecht in one seven one three a further franco 
spanish effort to recover gibraltar was unsuccessful minorca was ceded to spain 
in the peace treaty whitehaven an interesting footnote to this war was the 
actual landing on britain itself of a ship from the u s navy this occurred in 
one seven seven eight when the port of whitehaven in cumberland was raided by 
john paul jones the landing was a surprise attack taken as an action of revenge 
by jones and was never intended as an invasion nevertheless it caused hysteria 
in england with the attack showing a weakness that could be exploited by other 
states such as france or spain its result was an intense period of 
fortification in british ports war s end the northern southern and naval 
theaters of the war converged at yorktown in one seven eight one on september 
five one seven eight one french naval forces defeated the british royal navy at 
the battle of the chesapeake cutting off cornwallis s supplies and transport 
washington hurriedly moved his troops from new york and a combined franco 
american force of one seven zero zero zero troops commenced the battle of 
yorktown on october six one seven eight one cornwallis s position quickly 
became untenable and on october one nine his army surrendered the war was all 
but over surrender of cornwallis at yorktown john trumbull one seven nine seven 
on the right is the american flag on the left is the french flag white flag of 
the monarchy despite the painting s title cornwallis claiming illness was not 
present and is not depicted washington is on horseback in the right background 
because the british commander was absent military protocol dictated that 
washington have a subordinate in this case benjamin lincoln accept the 
surrender british prime minister lord north resigned soon after hearing the 
news from yorktown in april one seven eight two the british house of commons 
voted to end the war in america on november three zero one seven eight two 
preliminary peace articles were signed in paris the formal end of the war did 
not occur until the treaty of paris was signed on september three one seven 
eight three and the united states congress ratified the treaty on january one 
four one seven eight four the last british troops left new york city on 
november two five one seven eight three the reasons for great britain s 
misfortunes and defeat may be summarized as follows misconception by the home 
government of the temper and reserve strength of her colonists disbelief at the 
outset in the probability of a protracted struggle covering the immense 
territory in america consequent failure of the british to use their more 
efficient military strength effectively the safe and fabian generalship of 
washington and perhaps most significantly the french alliance and european 
combinations by which at the close of the conflict left great britain without a 
friend or ally on the continent decisive victory eluded the united states on 
the western frontier great britain negotiated the paris peace treaty without 
consulting her indian allies however and ceded much american indian territory 
to the united states full of resentment native americans reluctantly confirmed 
these land cessions with the united states in a series of treaties but the 
result was essentially an armed truce the fighting would be renewed in 
conflicts along the frontier the largest being the northwest indian war 
casualties the total loss of life resulting from the american revolutionary war 
is unknown as was typical in the wars of the era disease claimed more lives 
than battle the war took place in the context of a massive smallpox epidemic in 
north america that probably killed more than one three zero zero zero zero 
people historian joseph j ellis suggests that washington s decision to have his 
troops inoculated may have been the commander in chief s most important 
strategic decision casualty figures for the american revolutionaries have 
varied over the years a recent scholarly estimate lists six eight two four 
killed and eight four four five wounded in action the number of revolutionary 
troop deaths from disease and other non combat causes is estimated at about one 
eight five zero zero approximately one two zero zero germans were killed in 
action and six three five four died from illness or accident about one six zero 
zero zero of the remaining german troops returned home but roughly five five 
zero zero remained in the united states after the war for various reasons many 
becoming american citizens no reliable statistics exist for the number of 
casualties among other groups including american loyalists british regulars 
american indians french and spanish troops and civilians see also list of 
important people in the era of the american revolution battles of the american 
revolutionary war intelligence in the american revolutionary war american 
revolution prisoners of war british prison ships new york france in the 
american revolutionary war spain in the american revolutionary war the 
netherlands in the american revolutionary war the society of the cincinnati 
daughters of the american revolution timeline of united states revolutionary 
history one seven six zero one seven eight nine newburgh conspiracy list of 
british forces in the american revolutionary war list of continental forces in 
the american revolutionary war last surviving united states war veterans south 
carolina during the american revolution new jersey during the american 
revolution evacuation day new york notes percentage of loyalists and 
revolutionaries robert m calhoon loyalism and neutrality in the blackwell 
encyclopedia of the american revolution p two four seven number of loyalist 
troops boatner p six six three size of revolutionary armies boatner p two six 
four british troop strength black pp two seven two nine number of germans hired 
boatner pp four two four two six british usage of escaped slaves kaplan indians 
and the new republic in the blackwell encyclopedia of the american revolution p 
three nine three number of iroquois warriors boatner p five four five smallpox 
epidemic fenn p two seven five a great number of these smallpox deaths occurred 
outside the theater of war in mexico or among american indians west of the 
mississippi river washington and inoculation ellis p eight seven revolutionary 
dead and wounded chambers p eight four nine references black jeremy war for 
america the fight for independence one seven seven five one seven eight three 
st martin s press new york and sutton publishing uk one nine nine one isbn zero 
three one two zero six seven one three five one nine nine one isbn zero three 
one two one two three four six nine one nine nine four paperback isbn zero 
seven five zero nine two eight zero eight five two zero zero one paperpack 
boatner mark mayo iii encyclopedia of the american revolution new york mckay 
one nine six six revised one nine seven four isbn zero eight one one seven zero 
five seven eight one chambers john whiteclay ii ed in chief the oxford 
companion to american military history oxford oxford university press one nine 
nine nine isbn zero one nine five zero seven one nine eight zero ellis joseph j 
his excellency george washington new york knopf two zero zero four isbn one 
four zero zero zero four zero three one zero fenn elizabeth anne pox americana 
the great smallpox epidemic of one seven seven five eight two new york hill and 
wang two zero zero one isbn zero eight zero nine zero seven eight two zero one 
greene jack p and j r pole eds the blackwell encyclopedia of the american 
revolution malden massachusetts blackwell one nine nine one reprint one nine 
nine nine isbn one five five seven eight six five four seven seven kaplan 
sidney and emma nogrady kaplan the black presence in the era of the american 
revolution amherst massachusetts the university of massachusetts press one nine 
eight nine isbn zero eight seven zero two three six six three six wood w j 
battles of the revolutionary war one seven seven five one seven eight one 
originally published chapel hill n c algonquin one nine nine zero reprinted by 
da capo press one nine nine five isbn zero three zero six eight zero six one 
seven seven paperback isbn zero three zero six eight one three two nine seven 
two zero zero three paperback reprint further reading allen gardner w a naval 
history of the american revolution one nine one three black jeremy war for 
america the fight for independence one seven seven five one seven eight three 
one nine nine one british viewpoint boatner mark mayo iii encyclopedia of the 
american revolution new york mckay one nine six six revised one nine seven four 
isbn zero eight one one seven zero five seven eight one buchanan john the road 
to valley forge how washington built the army that won the revolution two zero 
zero four fischer david hackett washington s crossing two zero zero four 
pulitzer prize winning narrative of one seven seven six seven seven 
higginbotham don the war of american independence military attitudes policies 
and practice one seven six three one seven eight nine one nine eight three 
online in acls history e book project overview of military topics kwasny mark v 
washington s partisan war one seven seven five one seven eight three one nine 
nine six mccullough david one seven seven six two zero zero five mackesy piers 
the war for america one seven seven five one seven eight three one nine nine 
two british viewpoint middlekauff robert the glorious cause the american 
revolution one seven six three one seven eight nine one nine eight four miller 
john c triumph of freedom one seven seven five one seven eight three one nine 
four eight schecter barnet battle for new york the city at the heart of the 
american revolution two zero zero two the largest military venture of the 
entire war and the british albatross thayer theodore nathanael greene 
strategist of the american revolution one nine six zero unger harlow giles 
lafayette two zero zero two valentine alan lord george germain one nine six two 
the british war minister ward christopher the war of the revolution two vol one 
nine five two battle history weintraub stanley iron tears america s battle for 
freedom britain s quagmire one seven seven five one seven eight three two zero 
zero five external links battlefield atlas of the american revolution west 
point atlas histories of the battle of saratoga one seven seven seven american 
revolutionary war history resources entry to us army center for military 
history a huge bibliography spain s role in the american revolution from the 
atlantic to the pacific ocean african american soldiers in the revolution 
american revolution independence american revolutionary war national liberation 
movements rebellion for the different meanings of amp re see the disambiguation 
page the ampere symbol a is the si base unit of electric current equal to one 
coulomb per second it is named after andr marie amp re one of the main 
discoverers of electromagnetism definition the ampere is that constant current 
which if maintained in two straight parallel conductors of infinite length of 
negligible circular cross section and placed one metre apart in vacuum would 
produce between these conductors a force equal to two newton per metre of 
length explanation because it is a base unit the definition of the ampere is 
not tied to any other electrical unit the definition for the ampere is 
equivalent to fixing a value of the permeability of vacuum to zero four h m 
prior to one nine four eight the so called international ampere was used 
defined in terms of the electrolytic deposition rate of silver the older unit 
is equal to zero nine nine nine eight five a the ampere is most accurately 
realised using an ampere balance but is in practice maintained via ohm s law 
from the units of voltage and resistance the volt and the ohm since the latter 
two can be tied to physical phenomena that are relatively easy to reproduce the 
josephson junction and the quantum hall effect respectively the unit of 
electric charge the coulomb is defined in terms of the ampere one coulomb is 
the amount of electric charge formerly quantity of electricity carried in a 
current of one ampere flowing for one second current electricity then is the 
rate at which charge flows through a wire or surface one ampere of current i is 
equal to a flow of one coulomb of charge q per second of time t mathrm since a 
coulomb is approximately equal to six two four elementary charges one ampere is 
equivalent to six two four elementary charges such as electrons moving through 
a surface in one second more precisely using the si definitions for the 
conventional values of the josephson and von klitzing constants the ampere can 
be defined as exactly six two four one five zero nine six two nine one five two 
six five elementary charges per second see also si ohm s law electric shock 
external links a short history of the si units in electricity si base units 
units of electrical current notoc the following terms are used in american 
football and canadian football see also see also football football strategy 
zero nine n m defense a defense with n down linemen and m linebackers such as 
three three a defense with three lineman three linebackers and five defensive 
backs often called a three three stack three four defense a defensive formation 
with three linemen and four linebackers a professional derivative in the one 
nine seven zero s of the earlier oklahoma or five zero defense which had five 
linemen and two linebackers the three four outside linebackers resemble stand 
up ends in the older defense four three defense a defensive formation with four 
linemen and three linebackers several variations are employed first used by 
coach joe kuharich four six defense pronounced four six defense a defense with 
four four down linemen and six six linebackers four six defense pronounced 
forty six defense a formation of the four three defense four linemen and three 
linebackers in which three defensive backs the two cornerbacks and the strong 
safety crowd the line of scrimmage the remaining safety which is the free 
safety stays in the backfield it is also known as the bear defense because it 
was popularized by buddy ryan while coaching for the chicago bears not to be 
confused with the four six four six defense five zero defense a once popular 
college defense with five defensive linemen and two linebackers a audible from 
latin aud re to hear to listen to a play called by the quarterback at the line 
of scrimmage to change the play that was called in the huddle automatic see 
audible automatic first down for several of the most severe penalties including 
pass interference and all personal fouls a first down is rewarded to the 
offensive team even if the yardage of that penalty is less than the yardage 
needed for a first down b back a position behind the offensive line or behind 
the linebackers on defense blitz a defensive maneuver in which one or more 
linebackers or defensive backs who normally remain behind the line of scrimmage 
instead charge into the opponents backfield however in the three four defense 
one linebacker typically rushes the passer with the three down linemen this is 
not considered a blitz if an additional linebacker is sent bringing the total 
number of rushers to five it is a blitz blocking when a player obstructs 
another player s path with his body bootleg an offensive play predicated upon 
misdirection in which the quarterback pretends to hand the ball to another 
player and then carries the ball in the opposite direction of the supposed 
ballcarrier with the intent of either passing or running sometimes the 
quarterback has the option of doing either a naked bootleg is a risky variation 
of this play when the quarterback has no blockers pulling out with him contrast 
with scramble sneak and draw the box an area on the defensive side of the ball 
directly opposite the offensive linemen and about five yards deep having eight 
players in the box means bringing in a defensive back normally the strong 
safety to help stop the offensive team s running game c center a player 
position on offense the center snaps the ball centre canadian center chains the 
one zero yard long chain that is used by the chain crew to measure for a new 
series of downs check off see audible chuck and duck a style of offense with 
minimal pass protection requiring the quarterback to chuck the ball then duck 
to avoid a defensive lineman clipping an illegal block in which the victim is 
blocked from the back and below the waist the penalty is one five yards 
originally clipping was defined as any block from the back but is now 
restricted to blocks below the waist other blocks from the back are now 
punished with one zero yard penalties coffin corner the corner of the field of 
play a punter if he is close enough will often attempt to kick the ball out of 
bounds close to the receiving team s goal line and pin them back near their own 
end zone contain a defensive assignment on outside runs such as the sweep one 
defensive player usually a cornerback or outside linebacker is assigned to keep 
the rusher from getting to the edge of the play and turning upfield if executed 
properly the rusher will have to turn upfield before the play calls for it 
giving the linebackers a better chance of stopping the play for little or no 
gain cornerback cb a defensive back who lines up near the line of scrimmage 
across from a wide receiver their primary job is to disrupt passing routes and 
to defend against short and medium passes in the passing game and to contain 
the rusher on rushing plays counter a running play in which the running back 
will take a step in the apparent direction of the play ie the direction the 
line is moving only to get the handoff in the other direction weak side linemen 
will sometimes pull and lead the back downfield sometimes called a counter trap 
but not necessarily the play is designed to get the defense to flow away from 
the action for a few steps as they follow the linemen allowing more room for 
the running back crackback block an illegal block delivered below the opponent 
s waist by an offensive player who had left the area of close line play and 
then returned to it or was not within it at the snap the term is also used to 
describe a legal block delivered from the front or from the side with the 
offensive player s helmet in front of the blocked player by a wide receiver on 
a player who lined up inside of him cut a sharp change of direction by a 
running player also called a cutback see cut blocking below cut blocking a 
blocking technique in which offensive linemen and sometimes other blockers 
block legally below the waist i e from the front of the defensive player in an 
attempt to bring the defenders to ground making them unable to pursue a running 
back for the short time needed for the back to find a gap in the defense the 
technique is somewhat controversial as it carries a risk of serious leg 
injuries to the blocked defenders the nfl s denver broncos are especially 
famous or infamous for using this technique d dead ball a ball which is no 
longer in play defensive back a cornerback or safety position on the defensive 
team commonly defends against wide receivers on passing plays generally there 
are four defensive backs playing at a time but see nickel back and dime back 
defensive end de a player position on defense who lines up on the outside of 
the defensive line defensive tackle dt a player position on defense on the 
inside of the defensive line when a defensive tackle lines up directly across 
from the center he is known often as a nose tackle defensive team the team that 
begins a play from scrimmage not in possession of the ball dime back the second 
extra or sixth total defensive back named because a dime has the same value as 
two nickels double reverse a play in which the ball reverses direction twice 
behind the line of scrimmage this is usually accomplished by means of two or 
three hand offs each hand off going in an opposite direction as the previous 
one such a play is extremely infrequent in football some people confuse the 
double reverse with a reverse which is a play with two hand offs instead of 
three down one of a series of plays in which the offensive team must advance at 
least one zero yards or lose possession first down is the first of the plays 
fourth is the last down in american and third in canadian football a first down 
occurs after a change of possession of the ball after advancing the ball one 
zero yards following a previous first down or after certain penalties down 
lineman a player stationed in front of his line of scrimmage and who has either 
one three point stance or two four point stance hands on the ground draw play a 
play in which the quarterback drops back as if to pass then hands off to a 
running back or runs with the ball himself contrast with scramble drive a 
continuous set of offensive plays gaining substantial yardage and several first 
downs usually leading to a scoring opportunity a blocking technique drive block 
in which an offensive player through an advantaged angle or with assistance 
drive a defensive player out of position creating a hole for the ball carrier 
drop kick a kick in which the ball is dropped and kicked once it hits the 
ground and before it hits it again a half volley kick e eligible receivers 
players who may legally touch a forward pass on the passer s team these are the 
ends see below the backs and except in the nfl one player in position to take a 
hand to hand snap i e a t quarterback provided the player s shirt displays a 
number in the ranges allowed for eligible receivers all players of the opposing 
team are eligible receivers and once the ball is touched by a player of the 
opposing team anywhere in american or beyond the lines of scrimmage in canadian 
football all players become eligible encroachment an illegal action by a player 
to cross the line of scrimmage and make contact with an opponent before the 
ball is snapped or to line up offside and remain there when the ball is put in 
play end a player position either on offense or defense see linemen end zone 
the area between the end line or deadline in canadian amateur football and the 
goal line bounded by the sidelines extra point a single point scored in a 
conversion attempt by making what would be a field goal or a safety during 
general play f fair catch an unhindered catch of an opponent s kick the player 
wanting to make one must signal for a fair catch by waving an arm overhead 
while the ball is in the air after that signal if he gains possession of the 
ball it is dead immediately and opponents will receive a fifteen yard penalty 
for hitting him fantasy football american a game in which the participants 
called owners each draft on their own or with the aid of software a team of 
real life nfl players and then score points based on those players statistical 
performance on the field field of play the area between both the goal lines and 
the sidelines and in some contexts the space vertically above it field goal 
score of three points made by place or drop kicking the ball through the 
opponent s goal other than via a kickoff or free kick following a safety 
formerly goal from the field flanker a player position on offense a wide 
receiver who lines up one or more yards off the line of scrimmage outside of 
another receiver flat an area on the field between the line of scrimmage and 
one zero yards into the defensive backfield and within one five yards of the 
sideline running backs often run pass routes to the flat when they are the 
safety valve receiver flea flicker a trick play in which a running back 
laterals the ball back to the quarterback who then throws a pass to a wide 
receiver or tight end formation an arrangement of the offensive skill players a 
formation usually is described in terms of how the running backs line up e g i 
formation which refers to the half back is lined up about seven yard deep and 
the fullback is lined up about five yards deep both directly behind the 
quarterback or how the wide receivers line up e g trips left in which three 
wide receivers line up to the left of the linemen frequently the formation will 
allude to both such as with strong i slot right in which the halfback is lined 
up seven yards deep behind the quarterback the fullback is five yards deep 
behind the guard or tackle on the strong side and both wide receivers are lined 
up on the right side of the offensive line there are rules limiting what is 
legal in a formation all five offensive linemen must be on the line of scrimage 
a small amount of leeway is given to tackles when lined up for pass protection 
also there must be one receiver usally one tight end and one wide receiver 
lined up on the line on either side of the offensive line it doesn t matter how 
close they are to the tackles as long as they are on the line a receiver who is 
on the line may not go in motion forward pass a pass that touches a person 
object or the ground closer to the opponent s end line than where it was 
released from or is accidentally lost during a forward throwing motion four 
point stance a down lineman s stance with four points on the ground in other 
words his two feet and his two hands free kick a kick made to put the ball in 
play as a kickoff or following a safety the score safety touch in canadian 
football or fair catch free safety fs a player position on defense free 
safeties typically play deep or center field and often have the pass defense 
responsibility of assisting other defensive backs in deep coverage compared to 
strong safeties who usually have an assigned receiver and run support 
responsibilities fullback fb a player position on offense originally lined up 
deep behind the quarterback in the t formation in modern formations this 
position may be varied and this player has more blocking responsibilities in 
comparison to the halfback or tailback fumble a ball that a player accidentally 
lost possession of in canadian football the term includes muffs g goal a 
surface in space marked by a structure of two upright posts one eight feet six 
inches apart extending above a horizontal crossbar whose top edge is one zero 
feet off the ground the goal is the surface above the bar and between the lines 
of the inner edges of the posts extending infinitely upward centered above each 
end line in american and each goal line in canadian football goal area the end 
zone in canadian professional football goal line the front of the end zone 
gridiron a football field so called for its markings guard one of two player 
positions on offense see linemen a five player defensive line will have one and 
a defensive line of six or more players two guards while a defensive line of 
fewer than five players has no guard h hail mary a long pass play thrown 
towards a group of receivers near the end zone in hope of a touchdown used by a 
team as a last resort as time is running out in either of two halfs usually by 
a team trailing in the second half refers to the catholic prayer halfback a 
player position on offense also known as a tailback halfback option play a 
trick play in which the halfback throws a pass halo violation from one nine 
eight three until the end of the two zero zero two season in the ncaa college 
football the halo rule was a penalty for interference with the opportunity to 
catch a kick the so called halo rule stated that no player of the kicking team 
may be within two yards of a receiving team player positioned to catch a punt 
or kickoff before that person has touched the ball the rule was abolished 
beginning in the two zero zero three season hand off also known as backward 
pass a player s handing of a live ball to another player the hand off goes 
either backwards or laterally as opposed to a forward pass sometimes called a 
switch in touch football note different usage of term from its rugby meaning 
hash marks lines between which the ball begins each play the lines are parallel 
to and a distance in from the side lines and marked as broken lines h back a 
player listed in a roster or depth chart as a fullback and playing as a h ybrid 
of a fullback and a tight end holder a player who holds the ball upright for a 
place kick often backup quarterbacks are used for their superior ball handling 
ability holding there are two kinds of holding offensive holding illegally 
blocking a player from the opposing team by grabbing and holding his uniform or 
body and defensive holding called against defensive players who impede 
receivers who are more than five yards from the line of scrimmage but who are 
not actively making an attempt to catch the ball if the defensive player were 
to impede an offensive player in the act of catching the ball that would be the 
more severe penalty of pass interference huddle an on field gathering of 
members of a team in order to secretly communicate instructions for the 
upcoming play i i formation a formation that includes a fullback and tailback 
lined up with the fullback directly in front of the tailback if a third back is 
in line this is referred to as a full house i if the third back is lined up 
along side the fullback it is referred to as a power i incomplete pass a 
forward pass of the ball which no player legally caught inbounds lines the hash 
marks inside of a player s path relatively close in reference to the sides of 
the field to where the ball was snapped from thus a ballcarrier s path in 
crossing the neutral zone may be said to be inside of an opponent or an inside 
run in general and a rushing defensive player may be said to put on an inside 
move or inside rush of the movement of the ball between players directed toward 
a player who cuts between a player in the backfield who throws or hands the 
ball and the place from which it was snapped thus an inside pass or inside 
handoff an inside reverse sometimes called a scissors play is a reverse play 
via an inside handoff intentional grounding an illegal forward pass thrown 
beyond the line of scrimmage without an intented reciever and no chance of 
completion to any offensive player intentional grounding is not called in the 
case of a spike or if the quarterback was outside the tackle box at the time of 
the pass interception the legal catching of a forward pass thrown by an 
opposing player j jumbo an offensive package which includes two tight ends a 
full back and a half back similar to heavy jumbo in which either the half back 
or the fullback is replaced by another tight end often one or more of the tight 
ends is actually a linebacker the new england patriots use mike vrabel this way 
he has six career regular season tds or offensive linemen in these cases the 
player must report in as an eligible receiver whereas a tight end is assumed to 
be one k kick as a verb to strike the ball deliberately with the foot as a noun 
such an action producing a punt place kick or drop kick kickoff a free kick 
which starts each half or restarts the game following a touchdown or field goal 
the kickoff may be a place kick in american or canadian football or a drop kick 
in american football kick returner a player on the receiving team who 
specializes in fielding kicks and running them back kneel down a low risk play 
in which the quarterback kneels down after receiving the snap ending the play 
used to run out the clock l lateral a pass thrown to the side or backward also 
called backward pass in american football onside pass in canadian football line 
of scrimmage scrimmage line one of two vertical planes parallel to the goal 
line when the ball is to be put in play by scrimmage for each team in american 
football the line of scrimmage is through the point of the ball closest to 
their end line the two lines of scrimmage are called offensive line of 
scrimmage and defensive line of scrimmage in canadian football the line of 
scrimmage of the defensive team is one yard their side of the ball line to gain 
a line parallel to the goal lines such that having the ball dead beyond it 
entitles the offense to a new series of downs i e a new first down the line is 
one zero yards in advance of where the ball was to be snapped for the previous 
first down linebacker a player position on defense the linebackers typically 
play one to three yards behind the defensive linemen and have both run and pass 
defense responsibilities however they are often called on to blitz and in some 
formations a linebacker may be designated as a rush linebacker rushing the 
passer on almost every play lineman a defensive or offensive position on the 
line of scrimmage on offense the player snapping the ball is the center the 
players on either side of him are the guard s and the players to the outside of 
him are the tackle s the players on the end of the line are the end s this may 
be varied in an unbalanced line on defense the outside linemen are end s and 
those inside are tackle s if there are five or six linemen the inner most 
linemen are known as guard s this is rare in professional football except for 
goal line defense but is sometimes seen in high school or college live ball any 
ball that is in play whether it is a player s possession or not the ball is 
live during plays from scrimmage and free kicks including kickoffs long snapper 
a center who specializes in the long accurate snaps required for punts and 
field goal attempts most teams employ a specialist long snapper instead of 
requiring the normal center to perform this duty loose ball any ball that is in 
play and not in a player s possession this includes a ball in flight during a 
lateral or forward pass m man coverage same as man to man coverage man in 
motion a player on offense who is moving backwards or parallel to the line of 
scrimmage just before the snap in american football only one offensive player 
can be in motion at a time cannot be moving toward the line of scrimmage at the 
snap and may not be a player who is on the line of scrimmage in canadian 
football more than one back can be in motion and may move in any direction as 
long as they are behind the line of scrimmage at the snap man to man coverage a 
defense in which all players in pass coverage typically linebackers and 
defensive backs cover a specific player pure man coverage is very rare defenses 
typically mix man and zone coverage mike the m iddle linebacker mo the other 
middle linebacker in a three four formation muff a loose ball that is dropped 
or mishandled while the player is attempting to gain possession n national 
football league the largest professional american football league neutral zone 
the region between the lines of scrimmage or between the free kick restraining 
lines nfl the national football league nickel back an extra or fifth defensive 
back named after the coin worth five cents popularized by the miami dolphins in 
the one nine seven zero s now common no huddle offense a tactic wherein the 
offense quickly forms near the line of scrimmage without huddling before the 
next play nose tackle a tackle in a three man defensive line who lines up 
opposite the center s nose o offensive team the team with possession of the 
ball offside an infraction of the rule that requires both teams to be on their 
own side of their restraining line as or before the ball is put play offside is 
normally called on the defensive team in canadian football at the time a ball 
is kicked by a teammate being ahead of the ball or being the person who held 
the ball for the place kick one back formation a formation where the offensive 
team has one running back in the backfield with the quarterback other eligible 
receivers are near the line of scrimmage onside kick a play in which the 
kicking team tries to recover the kicked ball option usually a type of play in 
which the quarterback has the option of handing off keeping or laterally 
passing to one or more backs often described by a type of formation or play 
action such as triple option veer option or counter option teams running option 
plays often specialize in them less often a play in which a back may either 
pass or run outside opposite of inside p package the group of players on the 
field for a given play for example the nickel package substitutes a cornerback 
for either a linebacker or a defensive lineman the latter is referred to as a 
three three five nickel or the jumbo package substitutes a wide receiver with a 
tight end pass interference when a player illegally hinders an eligible 
receiver s opportunity to catch forward pass passing play a play in which a 
forward pass is made place kick kicking the ball from where it has been placed 
stationary on the ground or where legal on a tee play the action between the 
snap of the ball and the end of play signaled by the official s whistle for a 
tackle or out of bounds the plan of action the offensive team has for each snap 
for example a running play or pass play play action a tactic in which the 
quarterback fakes either a handoff or a throw in order to draw the defense away 
from the intended offensive method play clock a timer used to increase the pace 
of the game between plays the offensive team must snap the ball before the time 
expires currently the nfl uses four zero seconds two five seconds after a time 
out playing field see field of play pocket an area on the offensive side of the 
line of scrimmage where the offensive linemen attempt to prevent the defensive 
players from reaching the quarterback during passing plays position a place 
where a player plays relative to teammates and or a role filled by that player 
prevent defense a defensive strategy that utilizes deep zone coverage in order 
to prevent a big pass play from happening downfield usually at the expense of 
giving up yards at shorter distances often used against hail mary plays or at 
the end of the game when the defending team is protecting a lead disparaged by 
many fans john madden legendary player coach and commentator has been quoted as 
saying the only thing a prevent defense prevents is a win pulling a term used 
to describe an offensive lineman who instead of blocking the player in front of 
him steps back and moves down the line pulls to block another player usually in 
a trap or sweep punt a kick in which the ball is dropped and kicked before it 
reaches the ground used to give up the ball to the opposition after offensive 
downs have been used as far down the field as possible punter a kicker who 
specializes in punting as opposed to place kicking q quarterback qb an 
offensive player who lines up behind the center from whom he takes the snap 
quick kick an unexpected punt r receiver a wide receiver reception when a 
player catches receives the ball red dog a blitz red zone the area between the 
two zero yard line and the goal of the defensive team referee r the official 
who directs the other officials on the field he is one of seven officials 
restraining line a team s respective line of scrimmage at a free kick the line 
the ball is to be kicked from for the kicking team or a line one zero yards in 
advance of that for the receiving team reverse an offensive play in which a 
ballcarrier going toward one side of the field hands or tosses the ball to a 
teammate who is running in the opposite direction if the second ballcarrier is 
an end it is an end around run and shoot an offensive philosophy designed to 
force the defense to show its hand prior to the snap of the ball by splitting 
up receivers and sending them in motion receivers run patterns based on the 
play of the defenders rather than a predetermined plan running back a player 
position on offense although the term usually refers to the halfback or 
tailback fullbacks are also considered runningbacks running play a play where 
the offense attempts to advance the ball without passing rush trying to tackle 
or hurry a player before he can throw a pass or make a kick a running play s 
sack tackling a ball carrier who intends to throw a forward pass a sack is also 
awarded if a player forces a fumble of the ball or the ball carrier to go out 
of bounds behind the line of scrimmage on an apparent intended forward pass 
play the term gained currency ca one nine seven zero safety a player position 
on defense see free safety and strong safety a method of scoring worth two 
points by downing an opposing ballcarrier in his own end zone forcing the 
opposing ballcarrier out of his own end zone and out of bounds or forcing the 
offensive team to fumble the ball so that it exits the end zone a safety is 
also awarded if the offensive team commits a penalty within its own end zone 
after a safety the team that was scored upon must kick the ball to the scoring 
team from its own two zero yard line a safety scored during a try scores one 
point and is followed by a kickoff as for any other try safety valve a receiver 
whose job it is to get open for a short pass in case all other receivers are 
covered sam the s trong side outside linebacker scramble on a called passing 
play when the quarterback runs from the pocket in an attempt to avoid being 
sacked giving the receivers more time to get open or attempting to gain 
positive yards by running himself screen pass a short forward pass to a 
receiver who has blockers in front of him the receiver in this play is usually 
a running back although wide receiver and tight end screens are also used 
although the are both called screen passes the wide receiver screen and the 
running back screen are used for very different reasons in the case of a 
running back screen the play is designed to allow the pass rushers by the 
offensive linemen leaving the defender out of position to make a play the play 
is usually employed to defuse the pass rush in the case of a running back 
screen the wide receiver screen is a much faster developing play designed to 
catch the defense off guard scrimmage see play from scrimmage shift when two or 
more offensive players move at the same time before the snap all players who 
move in a shift must come to a complete stop prior to the snap shooting the 
action of a linebacker or defensive back to blitz shotgun formation formation 
in which offensive team may line up at the start of a play in this formation 
the quarterback receives the snap five eight yards behind the center sideline 
one of the lines marking each side of the field as adjective on the field near 
a sideline side zone the area between a hash mark and a sideline single wing a 
formation now out of fashion most popular about one nine two zero five zero 
with an overload and wingback on one side and two backs about five yards deep 
to receive the snap slobber knocker a particularly gruesome tackle or hit slot 
the area between a split end and the offensive line a pass receiver lined up in 
the slot at the snap of the ball may be called a slotback or slot receiver snap 
the handoff or pass from the center that begins a play from scrimmage sneak an 
offensive play in which the quarterback immediately on receiving the snap dives 
forward with the ball the play is used when a team needs a very short gain to 
reach either the goal line or the line to gain special teams the units that 
handle kickoffs punts free kicks and field goal attempts spike a play in which 
the quarterback throws the ball at the ground immediately after the snap 
technically an incomplete pass it stops the clock note that a spike is not 
considered intentional grounding splits the distance between the feet of 
adjacent offensive linemen said to be wide if there is a large gap between 
players or narrow if the gap is small split end a player position on offence a 
receiver who lines up on the line of scrimmage several yards outside the 
offensive linemen the term is no longer used in american football having been 
long since replaced by the wide receiver or wideout with no distinction between 
whether the receiver is on the line or not squib kick a type of kickoff in 
which the ball is intentionally kicked low to the ground typically bouncing on 
the ground a few times before being picked up this is done in the hopes of 
preventing a long return as the ball is often picked up by one of the upmen as 
opposed to the designated kickoff returner sticks the pole attached to the end 
of the one zero yard chain that is used by the chain crew to measure for a new 
series of downs i e the line to gain a new first down stiff arm or straight arm 
a ballcarrier warding off a would be tackler by pushing them away with a 
straight arm strong i a formation wherein the tailback is lined up deep 
directly behind the quarterback and the fullback is lined up offset to the 
strong side of the formation strong safety ss a kind of safety on defense as 
opposed to a free safety this is a central defensive back originally the term 
indicated that he lined up on the strong side of the field and covered the 
tight end however the modern usage of the term now indicates a central 
defensive back with responsibility for run and pass support slightly favoring 
run support strong side simplistically speaking the side of the field left or 
right that has the most players but it depends on the formations of the teams 
when a team uses one tight end the strong side is the side of the field where 
the tight end lines up if the offensive package uses no tight end or more than 
one tight end the strong side is the side of the field with the most offensive 
players on or just behind the line of scrimmage stunt a tactic used by 
defensive linemen in which they switch roles in an attempt to get past the 
blockers both defenders will start with power rushes with the stunting defender 
getting more of a push the other lineman will then go around him ideally using 
him as a pick to get free from his blocker sweep a running play in which 
several blockers lead a running back on a designed play to the outside 
depending on the number of blockers and the design of the play this is 
sometimes referred to as a power sweep or student body right or left t t 
formation a classic offensive formation with the quarterback directly behind 
the center and three running backs behind the quarterback forming a t numerous 
variations have been developed including the split t wing t and wishbone t 
tackle the act of forcing a ball carrier to the ground a player position on the 
line either an offensive tackle or a defensive tackle see linemen tackle box 
the area between where the two offensive tackles line up prior to the snap 
tailback player position on offense farthest deepest back except in kicking 
formations also often referred to as the running back particularly in a one 
back offense three and out when an offensive team fails to gain a first down on 
the first three plays of a drive and thus is forced to punt on fourth down 
three point stance a down lineman s stance with three points on the ground in 
another words his two feet and one of his hands tight end a player position on 
offense an eligible receiver ligned up on the line of scrimmage next to the 
offensive tackle tight ends are used as blockers during running plays and 
either run a route or stay in to block during passing plays touchback the act 
of downing the ball behind one s own goal line after the ball had been 
propelled over the goal by the opposing team after a touchback the team that 
downed it gets the ball at their own two zero yard line touchdown a play worth 
six points accomplished by gaining legal possession of the ball in the opponent 
s end zone it also allows the team a chance for one extra point by kicking the 
ball or a two point conversion see try below trap a basic blocking pattern in 
which a defensive lineman is allowed past the line of scrimmage only to be 
blocked at an angle by a pulling lineman designed to gain a preferred blocking 
angle and larger hole in the line trips a formation in which three wide 
receivers are lined up close to one another on the same side of the field also 
refers to those receivers used to create potential for confusion or collision 
between defenders as these receivers split up two point conversion a play worth 
two points accomplished by gaining legal possession of the ball in the opponent 
s end zone after a touchdown has been made see try below try a scrimmage play 
from close to their opponent s goal line awarded to a team which has scored a 
touchdown allowing them and in some codes their opponents to score an 
additional one or two points also called try for point conversion convert 
canadian extra point s point s after touchdown or pat u unbalanced line usually 
refers to an offensive formation which does not have an equal number of linemen 
on each side of the ball done to gain a blocking advantage on one side of the 
formation typically one tackle or guard lines up on the other side of the ball 
for example a common alignment would be e g c g t t e upman during a kickoff 
every player on the return team is called an upman with the exception of the 
one or two designated kickoff returners who stand furthest away from the 
starting point of the kicking team v veer a type of option offense using two 
backs in the backfield one behind each guard or tackle referred to as split 
backs allowing a triple option play give to either back or quarterback keep w 
weak i a formation wherein the tailback is lined up deep directly behind the 
quarterback and the fullback is lined up offset to the weak side of the 
formation weak side when one tight end is used the side of the field opposite 
the tight end in other offensive packages the side of the field with the fewest 
offensive players on or just behind the line of scrimmage west coast offense an 
offensive philosophy that uses short high percentage passes as the core of a 
ball control offense widely used but originally made popular by san francisco 
four nine ers coach bill walsh a main component of the west coast offense is 
use of all the eligible receivers in the short passing game wide receiver a 
player position on offense he is split wide usually about one zero yards from 
the formation and plays on the line of scrimmage as a split end or one yard off 
as a flanker will the w eak side linebacker wing back a player position in some 
offensive formations lines up just outside the tight end and one yard off the 
line of scrimmage may be a receiver but is more typically used as a blocking 
back wishbone a formation involving three running backs lined up behind the 
quarterback in the shape of a y similar to the shape of a wishbone x x receiver 
term used in play calling that usually refers to the split end or the wide 
receiver that lines up on the line of scrimmage for example split right jet 
five two nine x post tells the x receiver to run a post route y y receiver term 
usually used in offensive play calling to refer to the tight end for example 
buffalo right five three four boot y corner tells the y receiver to run a 
corner route z z receiver a term used in offensive play calling that usually 
refers to the flanker or the wide receiver that lines up off the line of 
scrimmage for example panther gun eight five slant z go tells the z receiver to 
run a go also called a fly or streak route zone defense a defense in which 
players who are in pass coverage cover zones of the field instead of individual 
players pure zone packages are seldom used most defenses employ some 
combination of zone and man coverage zone blitz a defensive package combining a 
blitz with zone pass coveragee allows the defense to choose the blitzer after 
the offense shows formation and pass coverage requirements and features 
unpredictable blitzes from different linebackers and defensive backs invented 
by coach dick lebeau american football terminology glossaries flowcharts are 
often used to represent algorithms in mathematics and computer science an 
algorithm is a procedure a finite set of well defined instructions for 
accomplishing some task which given an initial state will terminate in a 
defined end state informally the concept of an algorithm is often illustrated 
by the example of a recipe although many algorithms are much more complex 
algorithms often have steps that repeat iterate or require decisions such as 
logic or comparison the concept of an algorithm originated as a means of 
recording procedures for solving mathematical problems such as finding the 
common divisor of two numbers or multiplying two numbers the concept was 
formalized in one nine three six through alan turing s turing machines and 
alonzo church s lambda calculus which in turn formed the foundation of computer 
science most algorithms can be implemented by computer programs history the 
word algorithm comes from the name of the nine th century mathematician abu 
abdullah muhammad bin musa al khwarizmi the word algorism originally referred 
only to the rules of performing arithmetic using hindu arabic numerals but 
evolved via european latin translation of al khwarizmi s name into algorithm by 
the one eight th century the word evolved to include all definite procedures 
for solving problems or performing tasks the first case of an algorithm written 
for a computer was ada byron s notes on the analytical engine written in one 
eight four two for which she is considered by many to be the world s first 
programmer however since charles babbage never completed his analytical engine 
the algorithm was never implemented on it the lack of mathematical rigor in the 
well defined procedure definition of algorithms posed some difficulties for 
mathematicians and logicians of the one nine th and early two zero th centuries 
this problem was largely solved with the description of the turing machine an 
abstract model of a computer formulated by alan turing and the demonstration 
that every method yet found for describing well defined procedures advanced by 
other mathematicians could be emulated on a turing machine a statement known as 
the church turing thesis nowadays a formal criterion for an algorithm is that 
it is a procedure that can be implemented on a completely specified turing 
machine or one of the equivalent formalisms formalization of algorithms 
algorithms are essential to the way computers process information because a 
computer program is essentially an algorithm that tells the computer what 
specific steps to perform in what specific order in order to carry out a 
specified task such as calculating employees paychecks or printing students 
report cards thus an algorithm can be considered to be any sequence of 
operations which can be performed by a turing complete system typically when an 
algorithm is associated with processing information data is read from an input 
source or device written to an output sink or device and or stored for further 
use stored data is regarded as part of the internal state of the entity 
performing the algorithm the state is stored in a data structure for any such 
computational process the algorithm must be rigorously defined specified in the 
way it applies in all possible circumstances that could arise that is any 
conditional steps must be systematically dealt with case by case the criteria 
for each case must be clear and computable because an algorithm is a precise 
list of precise steps the order of computation will almost always be critical 
to the functioning of the algorithm instructions are usually assumed to be 
listed explicitly and are described as starting from the top and going down to 
the bottom an idea that is described more formally by flow of control so far 
this discussion of the formalization of an algorithm has assumed the premises 
of imperative programming this is the most common conception and it attempts to 
describe a task in discrete mechanical means unique to this conception of 
formalized algorithms is the assignment operation setting the value of a 
variable it derives from the intuition of memory as a scratchpad there is an 
example below of such an assignment see functional programming and logic 
programming for alternate conceptions of what constitutes an algorithm some 
writers restrict the definition of algorithm to procedures that eventually 
finish others include procedures that could run forever without stopping 
arguing that some entity may be required to carry out such permanent tasks in 
the latter case success can no longer be defined in terms of halting with a 
meaningful output instead terms of success that allow for unbounded output 
sequences must be defined for example an algorithm that verifies if there are 
more zeros than ones in an infinite random binary sequence must run forever to 
be effective if it is implemented correctly however the algorithm s output will 
be useful for as long as it examines the sequence the algorithm will give a 
positive response while the number of examined zeros outnumber the ones and a 
negative response otherwise success for this algorithm could then be defined as 
eventually outputting only positive responses if there are actually more zeros 
than ones in the sequence and in any other case outputting any mixture of 
positive and negative responses summarizing the above discussion about what 
algorithm should consist zero or more inputs one or more outputs finiteness or 
computability definitiveness or preciseness implementation an algorithm is a 
set of steps to perform a computation most algorithms will be implemented as 
computer programs they can be expressed in any notation including english for 
documenting and research purposes a more preferred way is to embody or 
sometimes called codify an algorithm by writing of its pseudocode pseudocode 
representation avoids ambiguities that are common in english statements the 
pseudocode can also be translated into particular programming language more 
straightforwardly algorithms are implemented not only as computer programs but 
often also by other means such as in a biological neural network for example 
the human brain implementing arithmetic or an insect relocating food in 
electric circuits or in a mechanical device example one of the simplest 
algorithms is to find the largest number in an unsorted list of numbers the 
solution necessarily requires looking at every number in the list but only once 
at each from this follows a simple algorithm which can be stated in english as 
let us assume the first item is largest look at each of the remaining items in 
the list and make the following adjustment a if it is larger than the largest 
item we gathered so far make a note of it the latest noted item is the largest 
in the list when the process is complete and here is a more formal coding of 
the algorithm in pseudocode input a non empty list of numbers l output the 
largest number in the list l largest l zero for each item in the list l one do 
if the item largest then largest the item return largest for a more complex 
example see euclid s algorithm which is one of the oldest algorithms algorithm 
analysis as it happens most people who implement algorithms want to know how 
much of a particular resource such as time or storage is required for a given 
algorithm methods have been developed for the analysis of algorithms to obtain 
such quantitative answers for example the algorithm above has a time 
requirement of o n using the big o notation with n as the length of the list at 
all times the algorithm only needs to remember two values the largest number 
found so far and its current position in the input list therefore it is said to 
have a space requirement of o one note that the size of the inputs is not 
counted as space used by the algorithm different algorithms may complete the 
same task with a different set of instructions in less or more time space or 
effort than others for example given two different recipes for making potato 
salad one may have peel the potato before boil the potato while the other 
presents the steps in the reverse order yet they both call for these steps to 
be repeated for all potatoes and end when the potato salad is ready to be eaten 
the analysis and study of algorithms is one discipline of computer science and 
is often practiced abstractly without the use of a specific programming 
language or other implementation in this sense it resembles other mathematical 
disciplines in that the analysis focuses on the underlying principles of the 
algorithm and not on any particular implementation the pseudocode is simplest 
and abstract enough for such analysis classes there are various ways to 
classify algorithms each with its own merits classification by implementation 
one way to classify algorithms is by implementation means recursion or 
iteration a recursive algorithm is one that invokes makes reference to itself 
repeatedly until a certain condition matches which is a method common to 
functional programming iterative algorithms use repetitive constructs like 
loops and sometimes additional data structures like stacks to solve the given 
problems some problems are naturally suited for one implementation to other for 
example towers of hanoi is well understood in recursive implementation every 
recursive version has an equivalent but possibly more or less complex iterative 
version and vice versa serial or parallel algorithms are usually discussed with 
the assumption that computers execute one instruction of an algorithm at a time 
those computers are sometimes called serial computers an algorithm designed for 
such an environment is called a serial algorithm as opposed to parallel 
algorithms which take advantage of computer architectures where several 
processors can work on a problem at the same time parallel algorithms divide 
the problem into more symmetrical or asymmetrical subproblems and pass them to 
many processors and put the results back together at one end the resource 
consumption in parallel algorithms is both processor cycles on each processors 
and also the communication overhead between the processors sorting algorithms 
can be parallelized efficiently but their communication overhead is expensive 
recursive algorithms are generally parallelizable some problems have no 
parallel algorithms and are called inherently serial problems those problems 
cannot be solved faster by employing more processors iterative numerical 
methods such as newton s method or the three body problem are algorithms which 
are inherently serial deterministic or random deterministic algorithms solve 
the problem with exact decision at every step of the algorithm random 
algorithms as their name suggests explore the search space randomly until an 
acceptable solution is found various heuristic algorithms see below generally 
fall into the random category exact or approximate while many algorithms reach 
an exact solution approximation algorithms seek an approximation which is close 
to the true solution approximation may use either a deterministic or a random 
strategy such algorithms have practical value for many hard problems 
classification by design paradigm another way of classifying algorithms is by 
their design methodology or paradigm there is a certain number of paradigms 
each different from the other furthermore each of these categories will include 
many different types of algorithms some commonly found paradigms include divide 
and conquer a divide and conquer algorithm repeatedly reduces an instance of a 
problem to one or more smaller instances of the same problem usually 
recursively until the instances are small enough to solve easily one such 
example of divide and conquer is merge sorting sorting can be done on each 
segment of data after dividing data into segments and sorting of entire data 
can be obtained in conquer phase by merging them a simpler variant of divide 
and conquer is called decrease and conquer algorithm that solves an identical 
subproblem and uses the solution of this subproblem to solve the bigger problem 
divide and conquer divides the problem into multiple subproblems and so conquer 
stage will be more complex than decrease and conquer algorithms an example of 
decrease and conquer algorithm is binary search algorithm dynamic programming 
when a problem shows optimal substructure meaning the optimal solution to a 
problem can be constructed from optimal solutions to subproblems and 
overlapping subproblems meaning the same subproblems are used to solve many 
different problem instances we can often solve the problem quickly using 
dynamic programming an approach that avoids recomputing solutions that have 
already been computed for example the shortest path to a goal from a vertex in 
a weighted graph can be found by using the shortest path to the goal from all 
adjacent vertices dynamic programming and memoization go together the main 
difference between dynamic programming and divide and conquer is subproblems 
are more or less independent in divide and conquer where as the overlap of 
subproblems occur in dynamic programming the difference between the dynamic 
programming and straightforward recursion is in caching or memoization of 
recursive calls where subproblems are independent there is no chance of 
repetition and memoization does not help so dynamic programming is not a 
solution for all by using memoization or maintaining a table of subproblems 
already solved dynamic programming reduces the exponential nature of many 
problems to polynomial complexity the greedy method a greedy algorithm is 
similar to a dynamic programming algorithm but the difference is that solutions 
to the subproblems do not have to be known at each stage instead a greedy 
choice can be made of what looks best for the moment difference between dynamic 
programming and greedy method is it extends the solution with the best possible 
decision not all feasible decisions at a algorithmic stage based on the current 
local optimum and the best decision not all possible decisions made in previous 
stage it is not exhaustive and does not give accurate answer to many problems 
but when it works it will be the fastest method the most popular greedy 
algorithm is finding the minimal spanning tree as given by kruskal linear 
programming when solving a problem using linear programming the program is put 
into a number of linear inequalities and then an attempt is made to maximize or 
minimize the inputs many problems such as the maximum flow for directed graphs 
can be stated in a linear programming way and then be solved by a generic 
algorithm such as the simplex algorithm a complex variant of linear programming 
is called integer programming where the solution space is restricted to all 
integers reduction it is another powerful technique in solving many problems by 
transforming one problem into another problem for example one selection 
algorithm for finding the median in an unsorted list is first translating this 
problem into sorting problem and finding the middle element in sorted list the 
goal of reduction algorithms is finding the simplest transformation such that 
complexity of reduction algorithm does not dominate the complexity of reduced 
algorithm this technique is also called transform and conquer search and 
enumeration many problems such as playing chess can be modeled as problems on 
graphs a graph exploration algorithm specifies rules for moving around a graph 
and is useful for such problems this category also includes the search 
algorithms and backtracking the probabilistic and heuristic paradigm algorithms 
belonging to this class fit the definition of an algorithm more loosely 
probabilistic algorithms are those that make some choices randomly or pseudo 
randomly for some problems it can in fact be proven that the fastest solutions 
must involve some randomness genetic algorithms attempt to find solutions to 
problems by mimicking biological evolutionary processes with a cycle of random 
mutations yielding successive generations of solutions thus they emulate 
reproduction and survival of the fittest in genetic programming this approach 
is extended to algorithms by regarding the algorithm itself as a solution to a 
problem also there are heuristic algorithms whose general purpose is not to 
find an optimal solution but an approximate solution where the time or 
resources to find a perfect solution are not practical an example of this would 
be local search taboo search or simulated annealing algorithms a class of 
heuristic probabilistic algorithms that vary the solution of a problem by a 
random amount the name simulated annealing alludes to the metallurgic term 
meaning the heating and cooling of metal to achieve freedom from defects the 
purpose of the random variance is to find close to globally optimal solutions 
rather than simply locally optimal ones the idea being that the random element 
will be decreased as the algorithm settles down to a solution classification by 
field of study every field of science has its own problems and needs efficient 
algorithms related problems in one field are often studied together some 
example classes are search algorithms sort algorithms merge algorithms 
numerical algorithms graph algorithms string algorithms computational geometric 
algorithms combinatorial algorithms machine learning cryptography data 
compression algorithms and parsing techniques see also list of algorithms for 
more details some of these fields overlap with each other and advancing in 
algorithms for one field causes advancement in many fields and sometimes 
completely unrelated fields for example dynamic programming is originally 
invented for optimisation in resource consumption in industries but it is used 
in solving broad range of problems in many fields classification by complexity 
some algorithms complete in linear time and some complete in exponential amount 
of time and some never complete one problem may have multiple algorithms and 
some problems may have no algorithms some problems have no known efficient 
algorithms there are also mappings from some problems to other problems so 
computer scientists found it is suitable to classify the problems rather than 
algorithms into equivalence classes based on the complexity see also complexity 
classes for more details legal issues some countries allow algorithms to be 
patented when embodied in software or in hardware patents have long been a 
controversial issue see for example the software patent debate some countries 
do not allow certain algorithms such as cryptographic algorithms to be exported 
from that country see also algorism approximation algorithms data structure 
randomized algorithm timeline of algorithms notes although in this example the 
size of the numbers itself is unbounded one could therefore argue that the 
space requirement is o log n in practice however the space taken up by a number 
is fixed references important algorithm related publications external links 
gaston h gonnet and ricardo baeza yates example programs from handbook of 
algorithms and data structures free source code for many important algorithms 
dictionary of algorithms and data structures this is a dictionary of algorithms 
algorithmic techniques data structures archetypical problems and related 
definitions numerical recipes computers algorithms dmoz org musicalgorithms an 
interesting way of using algorithms to make music the algorithmist is a web 
site dedicated to algorithms algorithms arabic words discrete mathematics 
mathematical logic an annual plant is a plant that usually germinates flowers 
and dies in one year annuals are often used in gardens to provide splashes of 
color as they tend to produce more flowers than perennials some perennials and 
biennials are grown in gardens as annuals for convenience particularly if they 
are not considered hardy for the local climate also many food plants are or are 
grown as annuals including most domesticated grains the life cycle of an annual 
can occur in a period as short as two or three months in some species though 
most last a bit longer vegetables grown in apartment container gardens can last 
up to two years if they are maintained indoors during the winter months 
examples of annual plants include peas cauliflowers basil and marigolds see 
also biennial plant perennial plant botany gardening anthophyta is a 
descriptive botanical name that may be used art one six icbn for what these 
days is more commonly known as angiospermae although in some classifications it 
was used for what now is known as spermatophyta the name anthophyta literally 
means flowering plants derived from the greek anthos flower and phyton plant 
plants plant taxonomy notoc this page is about the word atlas see also the 
abbreviation atlas written in all caps the most common meaning of atlas is 
atlas cartography a collection of maps by extension a road atlas is a 
collection of road maps many other entities are also called atlas some of which 
are listed below in science atlas anatomy is the topmost cervical vertebra of 
the spine atlas beetle insect atlas cedar tree atlas moon a moon of saturn 
atlas crater on the earth s moon atlas star a star in the pleiades star cluster 
atlas experiment the particle detector experiment in computers atlas computer 
university of manchester titan computer also know as atlas two university of 
cambridge univac one one zero one atlas computer engineering research 
associates univac one one zero three atlas ii computer engineering research 
associates atlas a programming language used for automated test equipment atlas 
ti a qualitative analysis software atlas programming microsoft s implementation 
of ajax programming for asp net in books and literature the atlas a book by the 
american author william vollmann atlas a book of photography by the german 
artist gerhard richter atlas shrugged a novel by ayn rand atlas games publisher 
atlas comics one nine five zero s was along with the one nine four zero s 
timely comics one of the two precursors of marvel comics atlas seaboard comics 
a short lived comic book company created in one nine seven four atlas a comic 
book series published by drawn quarterly atlas a marvel comics character in 
transportation atlas rocket atlas cheetah and atlas oryx aircraft atlas van 
lines a last name of charles atlas there are several people who go by this name 
teddy atlas boxing trainer of mike tyson natacha atlas a female musician atlas 
is a fictional robot who is the rival of astro boy in the one nine eight zero 
and two zero zero three animated series named after the latter atlas is a 
fictional character from marvel comics best known as a member of the 
thunderbolts comics other atlas mythology the titan of greek mythology atlas 
mountains atlas architecture the column atlas topology a collection of local 
coordinate charts in mathematics cf atlas a mexican football team atlas telecom 
romanian communications company atlas economic research foundation an incubator 
for free market think tanks antiseptic mouth rinse often called mouthwash is an 
oral hygiene product that claims to kill the germs that cause plaque gingivitis 
and bad breath however it is generally agreed that the use of mouthwash does 
not eliminate the need for both brushing and flossing common use involves 
rinsing one s mouth with about two zero ml two three oz of mouthwash two times 
a day after brushing the mouthwash is typically swished or gargled for about 
half a minute and then spit out active ingredients in commercial brands of 
mouthwash can include thymol eucalyptol methyl salicylate menthol chlorhexidine 
gluconate hydrogen peroxide and sometimes enzymes and calcium ingredients also 
include water sweeteners such as sorbitol and sodium saccharine and a 
significant amount of alcohol around two zero because of the alcohol content it 
is possible to fail a breathalyzer test after rinsing one s mouth many newer 
brands are alcohol free a salt mouthwash is a homemade treatment for mouth 
infections and is made by dissolving a teaspoon of salt in a cup of warm water 
dental equipment alexander the great fighting persian king darius iii not in 
frame alexander mosaic from pompeii from a three rd century bc original greek 
painting now lost alexander the great in greek transliterated megas alexandros 
alexander iii of macedon was born in pella macedon in july three five six bc 
died in babylon on june one zero three two three bc king of macedon three three 
six three two three bc is considered one of the most successful military 
commanders in world history if not the greatest conquering most of the known 
world before his death alexander is also known in the zoroastrian middle 
persian work arda wiraz n mag as the accursed alexander due to his conquest of 
the persian empire and the destruction of its capital persepolis he is also 
known in middle eastern traditions as dhul qarnayn in arabic and dul qarnayim 
in hebrew and aramaic the two horned one apparently due to an image on coins 
minted during his rule that seemingly depicted him with the two ram s horns of 
the egyptian god ammon he is known as sikandar in hindi in fact in india the 
term sikandar is used as a synonym for expert or extremely skilled following 
the unification of the multiple city states of ancient greece under the rule of 
his father philip ii of macedon a labor alexander had to repeat twice because 
the southern greeks rebelled after philip s death alexander conquered the 
persian empire including anatolia syria phoenicia gaza egypt bactria and 
mesopotamia and extended the boundaries of his own empire as far as the punjab 
alexander integrated foreigners non macedonians non greeks into his army and 
administration leading some scholars to credit him with a policy of fusion he 
encouraged marriage between his army and foreigners and practiced it himself 
after twelve years of constant military campaigning alexander died possibly of 
malaria typhoid viral encephalitis or even a drug overdose his conquests 
ushered in centuries of greek settlement and rule over foreign areas a period 
known as the hellenistic age alexander himself lived on in the history and myth 
of both greek and non greek cultures already during his lifetime and especially 
after his death his exploits inspired a literary tradition in which he appears 
as a towering legendary hero in the tradition of achilles early life bust of 
alexander iii in the british museum alexander was the son of king philip ii of 
macedon and of epirote princess olympias according to plutarch alexander three 
one three olympias was impregnated not by philip who was afraid of her and her 
affinity for sleeping in the company of snakes but by zeus plutarch alexander 
two two three relates that both philip and olympias dreamt of their son s 
future birth olympias dreamed of a loud burst of thunder and of lightning 
striking her womb in philip s dream he sealed her womb with the seal of the 
lion alarmed by this he consulted the seer aristander of telmessus who 
determined that his wife was pregnant and that the child would have the 
character of a lion aristotle was alexander s tutor he gave alexander a 
thorough training in rhetoric and literature and stimulated his interest in 
science medicine and philosophy after his visit to the oracle of ammon at siwa 
according to all five of the extant historians arrian curtius diodorus justin 
and plutarch rumors spread that the oracle had revealed alexander s father to 
be zeus rather than philip according to plutarch alexander two one his father 
descended from heracles through caranus and his mother descended from aeacus 
through neoptolemus and achilles aristotle gave him a copy of the illiad and a 
knife that he always hid under his pillow at night the ascent of macedon when 
philip led an attack on byzantium in three four zero bc alexander aged one six 
was left in command of macedonia in three three nine bc philip took a second 
wife to the chagrin of alexander s mother olympias which led to a quarrel 
between alexander and his father and threw into question alexander s succession 
to the macedonian throne in three three eight bc philip created the league of 
corinth alexander also assisted his father at the decisive battle of chaeronea 
in this year the cavalry wing led by alexander annihilated the sacred band of 
thebes an elite corps previously regarded as invincible philip was content to 
deprive thebes of her dominion over boeotia and leave a macedonian garrison in 
the citadel in three three six bc philip was assassinated at the wedding of his 
daughter cleopatra to king alexander of epirus the assassin was supposedly a 
former lover of the king the disgruntled young nobleman pausanias who held a 
grudge against philip because the king had ignored a complaint he had expressed 
philip s murder was once thought to have been planned with the knowledge and 
involvement of alexander or olympias another possible instigator could have 
been darius iii the recently crowned king of persia plutarch mentions an irate 
letter from alexander to darius where alexander blames darius and bagoas his 
grand vizier for his father s murder stating that it was darius who had been 
bragging with the greek cities of how he managed to assassinate philip after 
philip s death the army proclaimed alexander then aged two zero as the new king 
of macedon greek cities like athens and thebes which had been forced to pledge 
allegiance to philip saw in the new king an opportunity to retake their full 
independence alexander moved swiftly and thebes which had been most active 
against him submitted when he appeared at its gates the assembled greeks at the 
isthmus of corinth with the sole exception of the spartans elected him to the 
command against persia which had previously been bestowed upon his father the 
next year three three five bc alexander felt free to engage the thracians and 
the illyrians in order to secure the danube as the northern boundary of the 
macedonian kingdom while he was triumphantly campaigning north the thebans and 
athenians rebelled once again alexander reacted immediately and while the other 
cities once again hesitated thebes decided this time to resist with the utmost 
vigor the resistance was useless in the end the city was conquered with great 
bloodshed the thebans encountered an ever harsher fate when their city was 
razed to the ground and its territory divided between the other boeotian cities 
moreover all of the city s citizens were sold into slavery sparing only the 
priests the leaders of the pro macedonian party and the descendants of pindar 
whose house was the only one left untouched the end of thebes cowed athens into 
submission and it readily accepted alexander s demand for the exile of all the 
leaders of the anti macedonian party demosthenes first of all period of 
conquests map of alexander s empire the fall of the persian empire alexander s 
army had crossed the hellespont with about four two zero zero zero soldiers 
primarily macedonians and greeks but also including some thracians paionians 
and illyrians after an initial victory against persian forces at the battle of 
granicus alexander accepted the surrender of the persian provincial capital and 
treasury of sardis and proceeded down the ionian coast at halicarnassus 
alexander successfully waged the first of many sieges eventually forcing his 
opponents the mercenary captain memnon of rhodes and the persian satrap of 
caria orontobates to withdraw by sea alexander left caria in the hands of ada 
who was ruler of caria before being deposed by her brother pixodarus from 
halicarnassus alexander proceeded into mountainous lycia and the pamphylian 
plain asserting control over all coastal cities and denying them to his enemy 
from pamphylia onward the coast held no major ports and so alexander moved 
inland at termessus alexander humbled but did not storm the pisidian city at 
the ancient phrygian capital of gordium alexander undid the tangled gordian 
knot a feat said to await the future king of asia according to the most vivid 
story alexander proclaimed that it did not matter how the knot was undone and 
he hacked it apart with his sword another version claims that he did not use 
the sword but actually figured out how to undo the knot alexander battling 
darius at the battle of issus pompei mosaic alexander s army crossed the 
cilician gates met and defeated the main persian army under the command of 
darius iii at the battle of issus in three three three bc darius fled this 
battle in such a panic for his life that he left behind his wife his children 
his mother and much of his personal treasure sisygambis the queen mother never 
forgave darius for abandoning her she disowned him and adopted alexander as her 
son instead proceeding down the mediterranean coast he took tyre and gaza after 
famous sieges see siege of tyre alexander passed near but probably did not 
visit jerusalem in three three two bc three three one bc alexander was welcomed 
as a liberator in egypt and was pronounced the son of zeus by egyptian priests 
of the god ammon at the oracle of the god at the siwa oasis in the libyan 
desert he founded alexandria in egypt which would become the prosperous capital 
of the ptolemaic dynasty after his death leaving egypt alexander marched 
eastward into assyria now northern iraq and defeated darius and a third persian 
army at the battle of gaugamela darius was forced to flee the field after his 
charioteer was killed and alexander chased him as far as arbela while darius 
fled over the mountains to ecbatana modern hamadan alexander marched to babylon 
statuette of a greek soldier from a four th three rd century bc burial site 
north of the tian shan at the maximum extent of alexander s advance in the east 
r mqi xinjiang museum china drawing from babylon alexander went to susa one of 
the achaemenid capitals and captured its treasury sending the bulk of his army 
to persepolis the persian capital by the royal road alexander stormed and 
captured the persian gates in the modern zagros mountains then sprinted for 
persepolis before its treasury could be looted alexander allowed the league 
forces to loot persepolis a fire broke out in the eastern palace of xerxes and 
spread to the rest of the city it was not known if it was a drunken accident or 
a deliberate act of revenge for the burning of the athenian acropolis during 
the second persian war the book of arda wiraz a zoroastrian work composed in 
the three rd or four th century ad also speaks of archives containing all the 
avesta and zand written upon prepared cow skins and with gold ink that were 
destroyed but it must be said that this statement is often treated by scholars 
with a certain measure of skepticism because it is generally thought that for 
many centuries the avesta was transmitted mainly orally by the magians he then 
set off in pursuit of darius who was kidnapped and then murdered by followers 
of bessus his bactrian satrap and kinsman bessus then declared himself darius 
successor as artaxerxes v and retreated into central asia to launch a guerrilla 
campaign against alexander with the death of darius alexander declared the war 
of vengeance over and released his greek and other allies from service in the 
league campaign although he allowed those that wished to re enlist as 
mercenaries in his imperial army his three year campaign against first bessus 
and then the satrap of sogdiana spitamenes took him through media parthia aria 
drangiana arachosia bactria and scythia in the process he captured and 
refounded herat and maracanda moreover he founded a series of new cities all 
called alexandria including modern kandahar in afghanistan and alexandria 
eschate the furthest in modern tajikistan in the end both were betrayed by 
their men bessus in three two nine bc and spitamenes the year after hostility 
toward alexander during this time alexander adopted some elements of persian 
dress and customs at his court notably the custom of proskynesis a symbolic 
kissing of the hand that persians paid to their social superiors but a practice 
of which the greeks disapproved the greeks regarded the gesture as the preserve 
of deities and believed that alexander meant to deify himself by requiring it 
this cost him much in the sympathies of many of his countrymen here too a plot 
against his life was revealed and his companion philotas was executed for 
treason for failing to bring the plot to his attention parmenion philotas 
father who was at the head of an army at ecbatana was assassinated by command 
of alexander who feared that parmenion might attempt to avenge his son several 
other trials for treason followed and many macedonians were executed later on 
in a drunken quarrel at maracanda he also killed the man who had saved his life 
at granicus clitus the black later in the central asian campaign a second plot 
against his life this one by his own pages was revealed and his official 
historian callisthenes of olynthus who had fallen out of favor with the king by 
leading the opposition to his attempt to introduce proskynesis was implicated 
on what many historians regard as trumped up charges however the evidence is 
strong that callisthenes the teacher of the pages must have been the one who 
persuaded them to assassinate the king the invasion of india coin commemorating 
alexander s campaigns in india struck in babylon around three two three bc obv 
alexander standing being crowned by nike fully armed and holding zeus 
thunderbolt rev greek rider possibly alexander attacking an indian battle 
elephant possibly fleeing porus with the death of spitamenes and his marriage 
to roxana roshanak in bactrian to cement his relations with his new central 
asian satrapies in three two six bc alexander was finally free to turn his 
attention to india king ambhi ruler of taxila surrendered the city to alexander 
many people had fled to a high fortress called aornos alexander took aornos by 
storm alexander fought an epic battle against porus a ruler of a region in the 
punjab in the battle of hydaspes in three two six bc after attaining victory 
alexander made an alliance with porus and appointed him as satrap of his own 
kingdom alexander then named one of the two new cities that he founded 
bucephala in honor of his noble mount who had brought him to india alexander 
continued on to conquer all the headwaters of the indus river east of porus 
kingdom near the ganges river was the powerful empire of magadha ruled by the 
nanda dynasty fearing the prospects of facing another powerful indian army and 
exhausted by years of campaigning his army mutinied at the hyphasis modern beas 
refusing to march further east alexander after the meeting with his officer 
coenus was convinced that it was better to return alexander was forced to turn 
south conquering his way down the indus to the indian ocean he sent much of his 
army to carmania modern southern iran with his general craterus and 
commissioned a fleet to explore the persian gulf shore under his admiral 
nearchus while he led the rest of his forces back to persia by the southern 
route through the gedrosia present day makran in southern pakistan after india 
alexander and porus by charles le brun one six seven three discovering that 
many of his satraps and military governors had misbehaved in his absence 
alexander executed a number of them as examples on his way to susa as a gesture 
of thanks he paid off the debts of his soldiers and announced that he would 
send those over aged and disabled veterans back to macedonia under craterus but 
his troops misunderstood his intention and mutinied at the town of opis 
refusing to be sent away and bitterly criticizing his adoption of persian 
customs and dress and the introduction of persian officers and soldiers into 
macedonian units alexander executed the ringleaders of the mutiny but forgave 
the rank and file in an attempt to craft a lasting harmony between his 
macedonian and persian subjects he held a mass marriage of his senior officers 
to persian and other noblewomen at opis but few of those marriages seem to have 
lasted much beyond a year his attempts to merge persian culture with his greek 
soldiers also included training a regiment of persian boys in the ways of 
macedonians it is not certain that alexander adopted the persian royal title of 
shahanshah great king or king of kings however most historians believe that he 
did alexander let it be known that he intended to launch a campaign against the 
tribes of arabia after they were subjugated it was assumed that alexander would 
turn westwards and attack carthage and italy after traveling to ecbatana to 
retrieve the bulk of the persian treasure his closest friend and possible lover 
hephaestion died of an illness alexander was distraught and on his return to 
babylon he fell ill and died alexander s marriages and sexuality alexander s 
greatest emotional attachment is generally considered to have been to his 
companion cavalry commander chiliarchos and probable lover hephaestion they had 
most likely been best friends since childhood for hephaestion too received his 
education at the court of alexander s father hephaestion makes his appearance 
in history at the point when alexander reaches troy there the two friends made 
sacrifices at the shrines of the two heroes achilles and patroclus alexander 
honoring achilles and hephaestion honoring patroclus as aelian in his varia 
historia one two seven claims he thus intimated that he was the object of 
alexander s love as patroclus was of achilles following hephaestion s death 
alexander mourned him greatly and did not eat for days many have discussed 
alexander s ambiguous sexuality curtius reports that he scorned feminine 
sensual pleasures to such an extent that his mother was anxious lest he be 
unable to beget offspring to encourage a relationship with a woman king philip 
and olympias brought in a high priced thessalian courtesan named callixena 
later in life alexander married several princesses of former persian 
territories roxana of bactria statira daughter of darius iii and parysatis 
daughter of ochus he fathered two children heracles born by his concubine 
barsine the daughter of satrap artabazus of phrygia in three two seven bc and 
alexander iv of macedon born by roxana shortly after his death in three two 
three bc curtius maintains that alexander also took as a lover bagoas a eunuch 
exceptional in beauty and in the very flower of boyhood with whom darius was 
intimate and with whom alexander would later be intimate vi five two three 
bagoas is the only one who is actually named as the eromenos the beloved of 
alexander their relationship seems to have been well known among the troops as 
plutarch recounts an episode also mentioned by dicaearchus during some 
festivities on the way back from india in which his men clamor for him to 
openly kiss the young man bagoas sat down close by him which so pleased the 
macedonians that they made loud acclamations for him to kiss bagoas and never 
stopped clapping their hands and shouting till alexander put his arms round him 
and kissed him at this point in time the troops present were all survivors of 
the crossing of the desert bagoas must have endeared himself to them by his 
courage and fortitude during that harrowing episode whatever alexander s 
relationship with bagoas it was no impediment to relations with his queen six 
months after alexander s death roxana gave birth to his son and heir alexander 
iv besides bagoas curtius mentions yet another possible lover of alexander 
euxenippus whose youthful grace filled him with enthusiasm vii nine one nine 
allegations concerning alexander s sexuality remain highly controversial and 
excite passions in some quarters people of various national ethnic and cultural 
origins regard him as their hero some argue that historical accounts describing 
alexander s love for hephaestion and bagoas as sexual were written centuries 
after the fact and thus it can never be established what the historical 
relationship between alexander and his male companions were others argue that 
the same can be said about much of our information regarding alexander such 
debates however are generally considered anachronistic by scholars of the 
period who point out that the concept of homosexuality as understood today did 
not exist in greco roman antiquity sexual attraction between males was seen as 
a normal and universal part of human nature since it was believed that men were 
attracted to beauty an attribute of the young regardless of gender if alexander 
s love life was transgressive it was not for his love of beautiful youths but 
for his probable involvement with a man his own age in a time when the standard 
model of male love was pederastic see pederasty in ancient greece for more 
information the army of alexander the great before the battle of gaugamela the 
army of alexander was for the most part that of his father philip it was 
composed of light and heavy troops and some engineers medical and staff units 
about one third of the army was composed of his greek allies from the hellenic 
league infantry macedonian battle formation courtesy of the department of 
history united states military academy the main infantry corps was the phalanx 
composed of six regiments taxies numbering about two zero zero zero phalangites 
each each soldier had a long pike called a sarissa which was up to two one feet 
long and a short sword for protection the soldier wore a phrygian style helmet 
and a shield arrian mentions large shields the aspis but this is disputed as it 
is difficult to wield both a large pike and a large shield at the same time 
many modern historians claim the phalanx used a smaller shield called a pelta 
the shield used by peltasts it is unclear whether the phalanx used body armor 
but heavy body armor is mentioned in arrian one two eight seven and other 
ancient sources modern historians believe most of the phalangites did not wear 
heavy body armor at the time of alexander another important unit were the 
hypaspists shield bearers arranged into three battalions lochoi of one zero 
zero zero men each one of the battalions was named the agema and served as the 
king s bodyguards their armament is unknown and it is difficult to get a clear 
picture from ancient sources sometimes hypaspists are mentioned in the front 
line of the battle just between the phalanx and the heavy cavalry moreover they 
seem to have acted as an extension of the phalanx fighting as heavy infantry 
while keeping a link between the heavily clad phalangites and the companion 
cavalry they also accompanied alexander on flanking marches and were capable of 
fighting on rough terrain like light troops so it seems they could perform dual 
functions in addition to the units mentioned above the army included some six 
zero zero zero greek allied and mercenary hoplites also arranged in phalanxes 
they carried a shorter spear a dora which was six or seven feet long and a 
large aspis alexander also had light infantry units composed of peltasts psiloi 
and others peltasts are considered to be light infantry although they had a 
helmet and a small shield and were heavier than the psiloi the best peltasts 
were the agrianians from thrace cavalry the heavy cavalry included the 
companion cavalry raised from the macedonian nobility and the thessalian 
cavalry the companion cavalry hetairoi friends was divided into eight squadrons 
called ile two zero zero strong except the royal squadron of three zero zero 
they were equipped with a one two foot lance the xyston and heavy body armor 
the horses were partially clad in armor as well the riders did not carry 
shields as the xyston required both hands to wield the organization of the 
thessalian cavalry was similar to the companion cavalry but they had a shorter 
spear and fought in a looser formation of light cavalry the prodromoi 
forerunners secured the wings of the army during battle and went on 
reconnaissance missions several hundred allied horses rounded out the cavalry 
death contemporary bust of alexander the great on the afternoon of june one 
zero one one three two three bc alexander died of a mysterious illness in the 
palace of nebuchadrezzar ii of babylon he was just one month shy of attaining 
three three years of age various theories have been proposed for the cause of 
his death which include poisoning by the sons of antipater or others sickness 
that followed a drinking party or a relapse of the malaria he had contracted in 
three three six bc what is certain is that on may two nine alexander 
participated in a banquet organized by his friend medius of larissa after some 
heavy drinking immediately or after a bath he was forced to bed badly ill the 
troops started rumors more and more anxious and on june nine the generals 
decided to let the soldiers see their king alive one last time they were 
admitted to his presence one at a time while the king too ill to speak confined 
himself to move his hand the day after alexander was dead the poisoning theory 
derives from the story held in antiquity by justin and curtius the original 
story stated that cassander son of antipater viceroy of greece brought the 
poison to alexander in babylon in a mule s hoof and that alexander s royal 
cupbearer iollas brother of cassander administered it many had powerful 
motivations for seeing alexander gone and were none the worse for it after his 
death deadly agents that could have killed alexander in one or more doses 
include hellebore and strychnine in r lane fox s opinion the strongest argument 
against the poison theory is the fact that twelve days had passed between the 
start of his illness and his death and in the ancient world such long acting 
poisons were probably not available though this discounts the possibility of 
multiple doses however the warrior culture of macedon favored the sword over 
strychnine and many ancient historians like plutarch and arrian maintained that 
alexander was not poisoned but died of natural causes instead it is likely that 
alexander died of malaria or typhoid fever which were rampant in ancient 
babylon other illnesses could have also been the culprit including acute 
pancreatitis or the west nile virus recently theories have been advanced 
stating that alexander may have died from the treatment not the disease 
hellebore believed to have been widely used as a medicine at the time but 
deadly in large doses may have been overused by the impatient king to speed his 
recovery with deadly results disease related theories often cite the fact that 
alexander s health had fallen to dangerously low levels after years of heavy 
drinking and suffering several appalling wounds including one in india that 
nearly claimed his life and that it was only a matter of time before one 
sickness or another finally killed him no story is conclusive alexander s death 
has been reinterpreted many times over the centuries and each generation offers 
a new take on it what is certain is that alexander died of a high fever on june 
one zero or one one of three two three bc on his death bed his marshals asked 
him to whom he bequeathed his kingdom since alexander had only one heir it was 
a question of vital importance he answered famously the strongest before dying 
his final words were i foresee a great funeral contest over me alexander s 
funeral games where his marshals fought it out over control of his empire 
lasted for nearly forty years alexander s death has been surrounded by as much 
controversy as many of the events of his life before long accusations of foul 
play were being thrown about by his generals at one another making it 
incredibly hard for a modern historian to sort out the propaganda and the half 
truths from the actual events no contemporary source can be fully trusted 
because of the incredible level of self serving recording and as a result what 
truly happened to alexander the great may never be known alexander s body was 
placed in a gold anthropid sarcophagus which was in turn placed in a second 
gold casket and covered with a purple robe alexander s coffin was placed 
together with his armor in a gold carriage which had a vaulted roof supported 
by an ionic peristyle the decoration of the carriage was very rich and is 
described in great detail by diodoros according to legend alexander was 
preserved in a clay vessel full of honey which acts as a preservative and 
interred in a glass coffin according to aelian varia historia one two six four 
ptolemy stole the body and brought it to alexandria where it was on display 
until late antiquity it was here that ptolemy ix one of the last successors of 
ptolemy i replaced alexander s sarcophagus with a glass one and melted the 
original down in order to strike emergency gold issues of his coinage the 
citizens of alexandria were outraged at this and soon after ptolemy ix was 
killed its current whereabouts are unknown the so called alexander sarcophagus 
discovered near sidon and now in the istanbul archaeological museum is now 
generally thought to be that of abdylonymus whom hephaestion appointed as the 
king of sidon by alexander s order the sarcophagus depicts alexander and his 
companions hunting and in battle with the persians legacy and division of the 
empire coin of alexander bearing an aramaic language inscription after 
alexander s death his empire was divided among his officers mostly with the 
pretense of first preserving a united kingdom later his officers were focused 
on the explicit formation of rival monarchies and territorial states ultimately 
the conflict was settled after the battle of ipsus in phrygia in three zero one 
bc alexander s empire was divided at first into four major portions cassander 
ruled in macedon lysimachus in thrace seleucus in mesopotamia and iran and 
ptolemy in the levant and egypt antigonus ruled for a while in asia minor and 
syria but was eventually defeated by the other generals at ipsus three zero one 
bc control over indian territory was short lived when seleucus was defeated by 
chandragupta maurya the first mauryan emperor by two seven zero bc hellenistic 
states consolidated with the antigonid empire centered on macedon the seleucid 
empire in asia the ptolemaic kingdom in egypt palestine and cyrenaica by the 
one st century bc though most of the hellenistic territories in the west had 
been absorbed by the roman republic in the east they had been dramatically 
reduced by the expansion of the parthian empire and the secession of the greco 
bactrian kingdom alexander s conquests also had long term cultural effects with 
the flourishing of hellenistic civilization throughout the middle east and 
central asia and the development of greco buddhist art in the indian 
subcontinent influence on ancient rome a mural in pompeii depicting the 
marriage of alexander to barsine stateira in three two four bc the couple are 
apparently dressed as ares and aphrodite alexander and his exploits were 
admired by many romans who wanted to associate themselves with his achievements 
although very little is known about roman macedonian diplomatic relations of 
that time julius caesar wept in spain at the mere sight of alexander s statue 
and pompey the great rummaged through the closets of conquered nations for 
alexander s two six zero year old cloak which the roman general then wore as 
the costume of greatness however in his zeal to honor alexander octavian 
augustus accidentally broke the nose off the macedonian s mummified corpse 
while laying a wreath at the hero s shrine in alexandria egypt the unbalanced 
emperor caligula later took the dead king s armor from that tomb and donned it 
for luck the macriani a roman family that rose to the imperial throne in the 
three rd century a d always kept images of alexander on their persons either 
stamped into their bracelets and rings or stitched into their garments even 
their dinnerware bore alexander s face with the story of the king s life 
displayed around the rims of special bowls in the summer of one nine nine five 
during the archaeological work of the season centered on excavating the remains 
of domestic architecture of early roman date a statue of alexander was 
recovered from the structure which was richly decorated with mosaic and marble 
pavements and probably was constructed in the one st century a d and occupied 
until the three rd century notes one frank l holt alexander the great and the 
mystery of the elephant medallions university of california press two salima 
ikram nile currents general timeline alexander s character equestrian statue of 
alexander the great on the waterfront at thessaloniki capital of greek 
macedonia modern opinion on alexander has run the gamut from the idea that he 
believed he was on a divinely inspired mission to unite the human race to the 
view that he was a megalomaniac bent on world domination such views tend to be 
anachronistic however and the sources allow for a variety of interpretations 
much about alexander s personality and aims remains enigmatic alexander is 
remembered as a legendary hero in europe and much of both southwest asia and 
central asia where he is known as iskander or iskandar zulkarnain to 
zoroastrians on the other hand he is remembered as the destroyer of their first 
great empire and as the leveller of persepolis ancient sources are generally 
written with an agenda of either glorifying or denigrating the man making it 
difficult to evaluate his actual character most refer to a growing instability 
and megalomania in the years following gaugamela but it has been suggested that 
this simply reflects the greek stereotype of an orientalizing king the murder 
of his friend clitus which alexander deeply and immediately regretted is often 
cited as a sign of his paranoia as is his execution of philotas and his general 
parmenion for failure to pass along details of a plot against him however this 
may have been more prudence than paranoia modern alexandrists continue to 
debate these same issues among others in modern times one unresolved topic 
involves whether alexander was actually attempting to better the world by his 
conquests or whether his purpose was primarily to rule the world partially in 
response to the ubiquity of positive portrayals of alexander an alternate 
character is sometimes presented which emphasizes some of alexander s negative 
aspects some proponents of this view cite the destructions of thebes tyre 
persepolis and gaza as examples of atrocities and argue that alexander 
preferred to fight rather than negotiate it is further claimed in response to 
the view that alexander was generally tolerant of the cultures of those whom he 
conquered that his attempts at cultural fusion were severely practical and that 
he never actually admired persian art or culture to this way of thinking 
alexander was first and foremost a general rather than a statesman alexander s 
character also suffers from the interpretation of historians who themselves are 
subject to the bias and idealisms of their own time good examples are w w tarn 
who wrote during the late one nine th century and early two zero th century and 
who saw alexander in an extremely good light and peter green who wrote after 
world war ii and for whom alexander did little that was not inherently selfish 
or ambition driven tarn wrote in an age where world conquest and warrior heroes 
were acceptable even encouraged whereas green wrote with the backdrop of the 
holocaust and nuclear weapons as a result alexander s character is skewed 
depending on which way the historian s own culture is and further muddles the 
debate of who he truly was stories and legends according to one story the 
philosopher anaxarchus checked the vainglory of alexander when he aspired to 
the honors of divinity by pointing to alexander s wound saying see the blood of 
a mortal not the ichor of a god in another version alexander himself pointed 
out the difference in response to a sycophantic soldier a strong oral tradition 
although not attested in any extant primary source lists alexander as having 
epilepsy known to the greeks as the sacred disease and thought to be a mark of 
divine favor alexander had a legendary horse named bucephalus meaning ox headed 
supposedly descended from the mares of diomedes alexander himself while still a 
young boy tamed this horse after experienced horse trainers failed to do so 
there is an apocryphal tale appearing in a redaction of the pseudo historical 
alexander romance which details another end for the last true pharaoh of egypt 
soon after alexander s divinity was confirmed by the oracle of zeus ammon a 
rumor was begun that nectanebo ii did not travel to nubia but instead to the 
court of philip ii of macedon in the guise of an egyptian magician he coupled 
with phillip s wife olympias and from his issue came alexander this myth would 
hold strong appeal for egyptians who desired continuity in rule and harbored a 
strong dislike for foreign rule another legend tells of alexander s campaign 
down into the syrian world toward egypt on the way he planned to lay siege to 
the city of jerusalem as the victorious armies of the greeks approached the 
city word was brought to the jews in jerusalem that the armies were on their 
way the high priest at that time who was a godly old man by the name of jaddua 
mentioned also in the bible book of nehemiah took the sacred writings of daniel 
the prophet and accompanied by a host of other priests dressed in white 
garments went forth and met alexander some distance outside the city all this 
is from the report of josephus the jewish historian who tells us that alexander 
left his army and hurried to meet this body of priests when he met them he told 
the high priest that he had had a vision the night before in which god had 
shown him an old man robed in a white garment who would show him something of 
great significance to himself according to the account the high priest then 
opened the prophecies of daniel and read them to alexander in the prophecies 
alexander was able to see the predictions that he would become that notable 
goat with the horn in his forehead who would come from the west and smash the 
power of persia and conquer the world he was so overwhelmed by the accuracy of 
this prophecy and of course by the fact that it spoke about him that he 
promised that he would save jerusalem from siege and sent the high priest back 
with honors ancient sources the ancient sources for alexander s life are from 
the perspective of ancient history relatively numerous alexander himself left 
only a few inscriptions and some letter fragments of dubious authenticity but a 
large number of his contemporaries wrote full accounts the key contemporary 
historians are considered callisthenes his general ptolemy aristobulus nearchus 
and onesicritus another influential account was penned by cleitarchus who while 
not a direct witness of alexander s expedition used the sources which had just 
been published his work was to be the backbone of that of timagenes who heavily 
influenced many surviving historians unfortunately all these works were lost 
instead the modern historian must rely on authors who used these and other 
early sources the five main accounts are by arrian curtius plutarch diodorus 
and justin anabasis alexandri the campaigns of alexander in greek by the greek 
historian arrian of nicomedia writing in the two nd century ad and based 
largely on ptolemy and to a lesser extent aristobulus and nearchus it is 
considered generally the most trustworthy source historiae alexandri magni a 
biography of alexander in ten books of which the last eight survive by the 
roman historian quintus curtius rufus written in the one st century ad and 
based largely on cleitarchus through the mediation of timagenes with some 
material probably from ptolemy life of alexander see parallel lives and two 
orations on the fortune or the virtue of alexander the great see moralia by the 
greek historian and biographer plutarch of chaeronea in the second century 
based largely on aristobulus and especially cleitarchus bibliotheca historia 
library of world history written in greek by the sicilian historian diodorus 
siculus from which book one seven relates the conquests of alexander based 
almost entirely on timagenes s work the books immediately before and after on 
philip and alexander s successors throw light on alexander s reign the epitome 
of the philippic history of pompeius trogus by justin which contains factual 
errors and is highly compressed it is difficult in this case to understand the 
source since we only have an epitome but it is thought that also pompeius 
