were also allegations of both pro bush and pro gore tampering by low level 
operatives in the controversial counties it is unclear what effect if any this 
may have had and while the gore camp fought with some success to keep overseas 
absentee votes out in counties thought to be pro bush bush operatives similarly 
albeit while drawing less attention to their efforts prevented the counting of 
overseas absentee votes in strong democratic counties both sides contended that 
the votes were cast after election day and since many of the envelopes did not 
have cancelled stamps it was not clear when the votes were cast reports later 
surfaced that many overseas voters attempted to vote only after learning of the 
closeness of the florida vote some commentators still see such irregularities 
and the legal maneuvering around the recounts as casting doubt on the 
legitimacy of the vote as a matter of law however the issue was settled albeit 
controversially again when the u s congress accepted florida s electoral 
delegation only after a challenge to the florida electors was presented in the 
congressional chambers on january six two zero zero one by members of the 
congressional black caucus member after member went up decrying the lack of a 
senator who would be willing to co sponsor the challenge without any effect 
they thus failed to bring the challenge to a debate concern about the possible 
disenfranchisement of voters in the florida vote led to widespread calls for 
electoral reform in the united states and ultimately to the passage of the help 
america vote act which authorized the united states federal government to 
provide funds to the states to replace their mechanical voting equipment with 
electronic voting equipment however this has led to new controversies because 
of the security weaknesses of the computer systems the lack of paper based 
methods of secure verification and the necessity to rely on the trustworthiness 
of the manufacturers whose employees also count those votes although gore won 
the nationwide popular vote by more than five zero zero zero zero zero votes he 
lost the election by five electoral votes with one d c elector pledged to gore 
casting a blank ballot to protest the district s lack of representation in 
congress al gore on futurama joe lieberman later criticized al gore for 
adopting a populist theme during their two zero zero zero campaign lieberman 
said he objected to gore s people vs the powerful message believing it was not 
the best strategy for democrats to use to recapture the white house while 
running for president in two zero zero zero al gore was used as a voice actor 
for the television show futurama for which his daughter kristin was a writer he 
played himself again in another episode after the campaign was over private 
citizen professor gore al gore re emerges in two zero zero one as a visiting 
professor with a beard following his election loss gore accepted visiting 
professorships at columbia university s graduate school of journalism middle 
tennessee state university university of california los angeles and fisk 
university in late two zero zero one al gore became a senior advisor to google 
and vice chairman of los angeles based financial firm metropolitan west 
financial llc blasting bush on september two three two zero zero two gore spoke 
in san francisco to the commonwealth club and made a controversial speech 
blasting bush on the iraq war although he admitted saddam was a potential 
danger saying we know that saddam has stored secret supplies of biological and 
chemical weapons throughout his country iraq s search for weapons of mass 
destruction has proven impossible to deter and we should assume that it will 
continue for as long as saddam is in power he also spoke against rushing to war 
with iraq advising caution and saying that iraq was a diversion from fighting 
al qaeda and terrorism in afghanistan and elsewhere i don t think that we 
should allow anything to diminish our focus on avenging the three zero zero 
zero americans who were murdered and dismantling the network of terrorists who 
we know to be responsible for it the fact that we don t know where they are 
should not cause us to focus instead on some other enemy whose location may be 
easier to identify following the november five two zero zero two midterm 
elections gore re emerged into the public eye with a one four city book tour 
and a well orchestrated full gore media blitz which included a pair of policy 
speeches on september two three gore delivered a speech on the impending war 
with iraq and the war on terrorism that generated a fair amount of commentary 
less than two weeks later on october two he made a speech on bush s handling of 
the economy to the brookings institution also during this time period gore 
guest starred on several programs such as the late show with david letterman 
and saturday night live with legendary rock band phish appearing much more 
relaxed and funnier as a private citizen than he did while holding public 
office al gore hosting saturday night live along side west wing stars martin 
sheen and john spencer in two zero zero three gore joined the board of 
directors of apple computer on the political front gore kept his promise of 
staying involved in public debate when he offered his criticism and advice to 
the bush administration on key topics such as the occupation of iraq usa 
patriot act and environmental issues most notably global warming gore also 
continued to visit campuses across the nation lecturing on issues such as race 
media and democracy on april one zero two zero zero four gore met with the nine 
one one commission in private to give his testimony on what his administration 
did to prevent terror attacks in a statement after the three hour session the 
commission said he was candid and forthcoming and it thanked him for his 
continued cooperation in the summer of two zero zero four gore teamed up with 
moveon org to promote the new science fiction film the day after tomorrow 
although gore said the movie was a far fetched example of global warming he 
said the movie would escalate public debate on the issue on april two seven two 
zero zero five gore gave an hour long speech lambasting the gop s effort to do 
away with the legislative filibuster in response to senate majority leader bill 
frist who for weeks had repeated threats to impose the nuclear option if senate 
democrats did not stop blocking judicial nominees via the filibuster gore said 
their grand design is an all powerful executive using a weakened legislature to 
fashion a compliant judiciary in its own image the senate has confirmed two 
zero five or over nine five of president bush s nominees democrats have held up 
only one zero nominees less than five compare that with the six zero clinton 
nominees who were blocked by republican obstruction between one nine nine five 
and two zero zero zero what is involved here is a power grab gore said gore 
also took aim at what he called religious zealots who claim special knowledge 
of god s will in american politics he went on to say they even claim that those 
of us who disagree with their point of view are waging war against people of 
faith how dare they this was gore s first major policy speech of two zero zero 
five and also the first one since the defeat of democratic hopeful john kerry 
in late two zero zero four in may two zero zero five gore was awarded a 
lifetime achievement award for three decades of contributions to the internet 
the webby awards which are widely hailed as the oscars of the web wanted to set 
the record straight about al gore and the internet once and for all tiffany 
shlain the awards founder and chairwoman said it s just one of those instances 
someone did amazing work for three decades as congressman senator and vice 
president and it got spun around into this political mess shlain said in 
september two zero zero five gore chartered two aircraft to evacuate two seven 
zero evacuees from new orleans in the aftermath of hurricane katrina he was 
highly critical of the government and federal response in the days after the 
hurricane future speaking at an economic forum in stockholm sweden in october 
two zero zero five gore again stated that he has no intention of ever running 
for president again in response to questions from reporters however gore said 
he could not rule the possibility out completely saying i do not completely 
rule out some future interest but i do not expect to have that when asked how 
the united states would have been different if he had become president gore 
stated we would not have invaded a country that didn t attack us he said 
referring to iraq we would not have taken money from the working families and 
given it to the most wealthy families we would not be trying to control and 
intimidate the news media we would not be routinely torturing people gore said 
in the past few years gore has remained busy traveling the world speaking and 
participating in events mainly aimed towards global warming awareness and 
prevention on january two zero zero six al gore delivered a major speech 
criticising president bush s use of domestic wiretaps gore stated that bush 
broke the law and recommended an independent counsel investigate the matter 
further also in january two zero zero six al gore was the leading man in the 
sundance global warming documentary an inconvenient truth al gore will be 
publishing a second book on global warming titled an inconvenient truth in 
april two zero zero six on february one two two zero zero six former us vice 
president al gore on sunday said that the us government had committed terrible 
abuses against arabs living in america after nine one one attacks and that most 
americans did not support such treatment the thoughtless way in which visas are 
now handled that is a mistake mr gore said at the jeddah economic forum the 
worst thing we can possibly do is to cut off the channels of friendship and 
mutual understanding between saudi arabia and the united states the former us 
vice president told this saudi audience many of them educated in us 
universities that arabs in the united states had been indiscriminately rounded 
up often on minor charges of overstaying a visa or not having a green card in 
proper order and held in conditions that were just unforgivable unfortunately 
there have been terrible abuses and it s wrong i do want you to know that it 
does not represent the desires or wishes or feelings of the majority of the 
citizens of my country terrence jeffrey of human events and jack kelly of 
realclearpolitics com however criticized gore s comments and pointed out that 
nine one one commission page four nine two reported that khalid sheikh mohammed 
who planned the attacks told interrogators most of the hijackers he selected 
were saudis because they had the easiest time getting visas mohammad atta 
himself was in the united states having overstayed his visa television network 
al gore s current official logo on may four two zero zero four indtv holdings a 
company co founded by gore and joel hyatt purchased cable news channel 
newsworld international from vivendi universal the new network will not have 
political leanings gore said but will serve as an independent voice for a 
target audience of people between one eight and three four who want to learn 
about the world in a voice they recognize and a view they recognize as their 
own the network was relaunched under the name current on august one two zero 
zero five investment firm in late two zero zero four it was announced that al 
gore had launched and will chair an investment firm to seek out companies 
taking a responsible view on big global issues like climate change gore s group 
generation investment management was created to assist the growing demand for 
an investment style which can bring returns by blending traditional equity 
research with a focus on more intangible non financial factors such as social 
and environmental responsibility and corporate governance two zero zero four 
presidential election endorsing dean al gore shocked many when he did not 
endorse his two zero zero zero running mate joe lieberman but the outsider 
candidate howard dean in two zero zero three initially al gore was touted as a 
logical opponent of george w bush in the two zero zero four united states 
presidential election on december one six two zero zero two however gore 
announced that he would not run in two zero zero four saying that it was time 
for fresh faces and new ideas to emerge from the democrats when he appeared on 
a six zero minutes interview gore said that he felt if he had run the focus of 
the election would be the rematch rather than the issues gore s former running 
mate joe lieberman quickly announced his own candidacy for the presidency which 
he had vowed he would not do if gore ran despite gore taking himself out of the 
race a handful of his supporters formed a national campaign to draft him into 
running however that effort largely came to an end when gore publicly endorsed 
vermont governor howard dean over his former running mate joe lieberman weeks 
before the first primary of the election cycle there was still some effort to 
encourage write in votes for gore in the primaries by a different group of gore 
supporters who were separate from the draft movement although gore did receive 
a small number of votes in new hampshire and new mexico that effort was halted 
when john kerry pulled into the lead for the nomination gore s endorsement of 
dean was helpful to the latter in legitimizing him in the eyes of the 
establishment faction of the democratic party but it also led the media to dub 
dean as the clear front runner with the result that his opponents devoted more 
of their emphasis to opposing him campaigning against bush on january one five 
two zero zero four al gore gave a major policy address in new york city on 
climate change and the bush administration s approach to the environment 
accompanied by slides and projector gore slammed the bush administration s 
attitude towards global warming saying there are many who still do not believe 
that global warming is a problem at all and it s no wonder because they are the 
targets of a massive and well organized campaign of disinformation lavishly 
funded by polluters who are determined to prevent any action to reduce the 
greenhouse gas emissions that cause global warming out of a fear that their 
profits might be affected if they had to stop dumping so much pollution into 
the atmosphere on february nine two zero zero four on the eve of the tennessee 
primary gore gave what many consider his harshest criticism of the president 
yet when he accused george w bush of betraying the country by using the nine 
one one attacks as a justification for the invasion of iraq he betrayed this 
country mr gore shouted into the microphone he played on our fears he took 
america on an ill conceived foreign adventure dangerous to our troops an 
adventure preordained and planned before nine one one ever took place gore also 
urged all democrats to unite behind their eventual nominee proclaiming any one 
of these candidates is far better than george w bush in march two zero zero 
four gore along with former presidents bill clinton and jimmy carter united 
behind kerry as the presumptive democratic nominee al gore who just four years 
prior accepted his party s nomination speaks as a party elder at the two zero 
zero four democratic national convention on april two eight two zero zero four 
gore announced that he would be donating six million to various democratic 
party groups drawing from his funds left over from his two zero zero zero 
presidential campaign gore pledged to donate four million to the democratic 
national committee the party s senate and house committees would each get one 
million and the party from gore s home state of tennessee would receive two 
five zero zero zero zero in addition gore announced that all of the surplus 
funds in his recount fund from the two zero zero zero election controversy that 
resulted in the supreme court halting the counting of the ballots a total of 
two four zero zero zero zero will be donated to the florida democratic party in 
his speech gore stressed the importance of voting and having every vote counted 
a point that foreshadowed the two zero zero four u s election voting 
controversies on may two six two zero zero four gore gave a highly critical 
speech on the iraq crisis and the bush administration in the speech gore 
demanded secretary of defense donald rumsfeld national security advisor 
condoleezza rice director of central intelligence george tenet deputy secretary 
of defense paul wolfowitz undersecretary of defense for policy douglas feith 
and under secretary of defense for intelligence stephen cambone all resign for 
encouraging policies that led to the abuse of iraqi prisoners and fanned hatred 
of americans abroad during the fiery speech which lasted more than an hour gore 
called the bush administration s iraq war plan incompetent and called george w 
bush the most dishonest president since richard nixon who resigned the office 
of the presidency in one nine seven four following the watergate scandal gore 
also decried the abuse of prisoners in abu ghraib prison in iraq saying what 
happened at that prison it is now clear is not the result of random acts of a 
few bad apples it was the natural consequence of the bush administration policy 
convention as the first major speaker at the two zero zero four democratic 
national convention gore held himself out as a living reminder that every vote 
counts let s make sure not only that the supreme court does not pick the next 
president but also that this president is not the one who picks the next 
supreme court said gore gore directed remarks to supporters of third party 
presidential candidate ralph nader who abandoned the democratic party four 
years ago asking them do you still believe that there was no difference between 
the candidates post convention on october one eight two zero zero four al gore 
delivered his final major policy speech of the two zero zero four political 
season in an hour long presentation gore concluded that i m convinced that most 
of the president s frequent departures from fact based analysis have much more 
to do with right wing political and economic ideology than with the bible views 
and controversies gore is a strong supporter of abortion rights free trade and 
strong environmental policy he was a vocal opponent of the two zero zero three 
invasion of iraq gore has gradually moved politically further left he was once 
a moderate to conservative lawmaker while in congress gore had a strong pro 
life record on abortion and voted pro life two seven times when exactly gore 
became pro choice is unknown but by one nine eight eight when he sought the 
democratic presidential nomination he was on record as opposing the 
criminalization of abortion critics have charged gore with illegal fundraising 
at a buddhist temple and illegal use of his government office and telephone for 
political fundraising in violation of the hatch act although he was never 
indicted on such a charge the internet gore is a frequent target of satire 
based on his supposedly having claimed to have invented the internet in fact he 
never made such a claim rather during an interview with wolf blitzer on cnn s 
late edition on march nine one nine nine nine gore stated during my service in 
the united states congress i took the initiative in creating the internet i 
took the initiative in moving forward a whole range of initiatives that have 
proven to be important to our country s economic growth and environmental 
protection improvements in our educational system the phrase from the statement 
above which sparked the debate i took the initiative in creating the internet 
referred to gore s involvement with and sponsorship of the high performance 
computing act of one nine nine one which advanced the growth and mainstreaming 
of the internet during the one nine nine zero s this statement was later 
defended by internet pioneers robert kahn and vinton cerf as the two people who 
designed the basic architecture and the core protocols that make the internet 
work we would like to acknowledge vp gore s contributions as a congressman 
senator and as vice president no other elected official to our knowledge has 
made a greater contribution over a longer period of time accusations of 
hypocrisy by mcclellan and gonzales on the one six th of january two zero zero 
six gore accused u s president bush of breaking the law repeatedly and 
insistently and called for a special investigation of nsa spying on americans 
because the spying was without a warrant from a special federal court that 
authorizes such requests to eavesdrop on americans bush press secretary scott 
mcclellan and attorney general alberto gonzales both responded to reporters 
that the clinton gore administration had done illegal warrantless physical 
searches themselves of aldrich ames without permission from a judge i think his 
hypocrisy knows no bounds mcclellan said of gore but the foreign intelligence 
surveillance act at the time did not cover physical searches the law had 
changed in one nine nine five gore claimed that because gonzales made a 
political defense for bush he was no longer eligible to review charges against 
bush and therefore must name a special counsel his charges are factually wrong 
said gore both before and after the foreign intelligence surveillance act was 
amended in one nine nine five the clinton gore administration complied fully 
and completely with the terms of the law see also al gore television credits 
the tonight show with jay leno august one two zero zero five saturday night 
live december one four two zero zero two the tonight show with jay leno 
november two seven two zero zero two futurama crimes of the hot november one 
zero two zero zero two seven days stairway to heaven october one one two zero 
zero zero the late show with david letterman september one four two zero zero 
zero futurama anthology of interest i may two one two zero zero zero larry king 
live april two zero two zero zero zero mad about you breastfeeding january six 
one nine nine eight late show with david letterman september eight one nine 
nine three external links the sns project and al gore general sites electgore 
two zero zero eight com elect al gore in two zero zero eight for current daily 
updated news on al gore discuss and debate on forum al gore for president for 
current daily updated news on al gore discuss and debate on forum al gore 
support center two zero zero eight the home of hardcore gore supporters al gore 
zero eight organize discuss act patriots for al gore the gore support site with 
a social conscience current tv the official nara online office of vice 
president gore one nine nine three two zero zero one clinton gore 
administration accomplishments the life of al gore washington post al gore on 
the issues a new approach for a new century international press institute world 
congress april two zero zero zero political donations made by al gore recent 
speeches by al gore gore s two zero zero six martin luther king day speech on 
nsa spying scandal and restoring the rule of law mp three audio transcript gore 
speaks on the threat to democracy gore s speech to the sierra club gore slams 
gop s efforts to end filibuster gore charges the bush administration with a 
failed presidency gore s remarks at the two zero zero four democratic 
convention gore says bush lied to push for war in iraq gore calls for the 
resignation of the bush team gore speaks on the use of fear in politics gore 
speaks on global warming and the environment gore calls for the repeal of the 
patriot act gore blasts bush for misleading america gore speaks on the build up 
to war with iraq and the war on terror gore speaks on matching our nation s 
economic course to our current realities al gore s current official website of 
the television station current al gore and the internet remarks as delivered by 
vice president al gore to the superhighway summit ucla one nine nine four 
another url with the speech al gore and the creation of the internet snopes 
analyzes gore s statement about his role in creation of the internet full text 
of vint cerf and robert kahn s email on gore and the internet al gore myths and 
media bias gore myths page media bias against al gore exposed al gore s early 
career in journalism columbia journalism review on gore s journalistic past one 
nine four eight births al gore anti iraq war veterans apple employees baptists 
democratic party united states presidential nominees futurama actors harvard 
alumni living people nashvillians politics and technology pro choice 
politicians u s democratic party vice presidential nominees members of the 
united states house of representatives from tennessee united states senators 
from tennessee vice presidents of the united states vietnam war veterans animal 
farm book cover animal farm is a satirical novel which can also be understood 
as a modern fable or allegory by george orwell ostensibly about a group of 
animals who oust the humans from the farm they live on and run it themselves 
only to have it corrupted into a brutal tyranny on its own it was written 
during world war ii and published in one nine four five although it was not 
widely successful until the late one nine five zero s animal farm is a thinly 
veiled critique and satire of soviet totalitarianism many events in the book 
are based on events from the soviet union during the stalin era orwell though a 
leftist he was for many years a member of the independent labour party was a 
critic of stalin and suspicious of moscow directed communism after his 
experiences in the spanish civil war plot when the farm s prize winning pig old 
major calls a meeting of all the animals of manor farm he tells them that he 
has had a dream in which mankind is gone and animals are free to live in peace 
and harmony he compares the humans to parasites and then proceeds to teach the 
animals a revolutionary song beasts of england the other animals begin to hope 
and dream for the revolution of such a day when old major dies a mere three 
days later three pigs snowball who teaches the animals to read napoleon and 
squealer assume command and turn his dream into a full fledged philosophy one 
night the starved animals suddenly revolt and drive the farmer mr jones his 
wife and his pet raven off the farm and take control the farm is renamed animal 
farm as the animals work towards a future utopia the seven commandments of the 
new philosophy of animalism are written on the wall of a barn for all to read 
the seventh and most important of which is that all animals are equal all 
animals work but the workhorse boxer does more than his fair share and adopts a 
maxim of his own i will work harder animal farm is off to a great start 
snowball teaches the other animals to read and write though few animals besides 
the pigs learn to read well food is plentiful due to a good harvest and the 
entire farm is organized and running smoothly even when mr jones tries his last 
ditch effort to retake control of the farm the animals easily defeat him at 
what they later call the battle of the cowshed soon however things begin to 
unravel as napoleon and snowball begin an epic power struggle over the farm 
when snowball announces his idea for a windmill napoleon quickly opposes it a 
meeting is held and when snowball makes his passionate and articulate speech in 
favour of the windmill napoleon only makes a brief retort and then makes a 
strange noise to call in nine attack dogs they burst in and chase snowball off 
of the farm in his absence napoleon declares himself the leader of the farm and 
makes instant changes he announces that meetings will no longer be held as 
before and a committee of pigs alone will decide what happens with the farm 
napoleon changes his mind about the windmill claiming through squealer that 
snowball stole the idea from him and the animals begin to work after a violent 
storm the animals wake to find the fruit of their months of labour utterly 
annihilated though neighbouring farmers scoff at the thin walls napoleon and 
squealer convince everyone that snowball destroyed it napoleon begins to purge 
the farm killing many animals he accuses of consorting with snowball in the 
meantime boxer takes a second mantra napoleon is always right napoleon begins 
to abuse his powers even more and life on the farm becomes harder and harder 
for the rest of the animals the pigs impose more and more controls on them 
while reserving privileges for themselves history is rewritten to villainise 
snowball and glorify napoleon even further each step of this development is 
justified by the pig squealer who on several occasions alters the seven 
commandments on the barn in the dead of night the song beasts of england is 
banned as inappropriate now that the dream of animal farm has been realised and 
is replaced by an anthem glorifying napoleon who begins to live more and more 
like a human the animals though cold starving and overworked remain convinced 
that they are still better off than when they were ruled by a man named jones 
mr frederick one of the two neighbouring farmers swindles napoleon by paying 
with forged banknotes and then attacks the farm and uses dynamite to blow up 
the recently restored windmill though the animals of animal farm eventually win 
the battle they do so at a great cost as many of the animals including boxer 
are wounded however boxer continues to work harder and harder until he finally 
collapses while working on the windmill napoleon sends for a van to come and 
take boxer to the veterinarian but as boxer is loaded up and the van drives 
away the animals read what is written on the side of the van alfred simmonds 
horse slaughterer and glue boiler squealer quickly reports that the van with 
the old writing has been purchased by the hospital and later that boxer has 
died in the hospital in spite of the best medical care many years pass and the 
pigs learn to walk upright carry whips and wear clothes the seven commandments 
are reduced to a single phrase all animals are equal but some animals are more 
equal than others napoleon holds a dinner party for the pigs and the humans of 
the area in the adjacent foxwood farm run by mr pilkington he announces his 
alliance with the humans against the labouring classes of both worlds the 
animals discover this when they overhear napoleon s conversations and finally 
realize that a change has come over the ruling pigs during a poker match an 
argument breaks out between napoleon and mr pilkington when they both play an 
ace of spades and the animals realise how they cannot tell the difference 
between the pigs and the humans the pigs walked on two feet and they adopted 
many of mr jones customs and principles the pigs have violated every one of the 
rules set out in the beginning which they set up this is when we come to the 
theme of this book power corrupts plot references to real events the ousting of 
the humans after the farmers forget to feed the animals russian revolution of 
one nine one seven led to the removal of the tsars after a series of famine and 
poverty the refusal of the humans to refer to animal farm by its new name still 
calling it manor farm may be indicative of the diplomatic limbo in which the 
soviets existed following their early history mr jones last ditch effort to re 
take the farm the battle of the cowshed russian civil war in which the western 
capitalist governments sent soldiers to try to remove the bolsheviks from power 
napoleon s removal of snowball stalin s removal of leon trotsky from power in 
one nine two seven and his subsequent expulsion napoleon stealing snowball s 
idea for a windmill stalin later shifted away from world socialism to socialism 
in one country which trotsky had originally promoted the windmill can also be 
considered a symbol of the soviet five year plans a concept developed by 
trotsky and adopted by stalin who claimed them to be his idea moses the raven 
leaving the farm for a while and then returning similar to the russian orthodox 
church going underground and then being brought back to give the workers hope 
boxer s motto napoleon is always right is strikingly similar to mussolini is 
always right a chant used to hail benito mussolini during his rule of italy 
from one nine two two to one nine four three during the rise of napoleon he 
ordered the collection of all the hens eggs in an act of defiance the hens 
destroyed their eggs rather than give them to napoleon during stalin s 
collectivization period in the early one nine three zero s many ukrainian 
peasants burned their crops and farms rather than handing them over to the 
government napoleon s mass executions of which many were unfair for the alleged 
crimes stalin executed his political enemies for various crimes after they were 
tortured and forced to falsely confess the four pigs that go against napoleon s 
will represent the white movement napoleon s replacement of the farm anthem 
beasts of england with an inane composition by the pig poet minimus animal farm 
animal farm never through me will you come to harm in one nine four three 
stalin replaced the old national anthem the internationale with the hymn of the 
soviet union the old internationale glorified the revolution and the people the 
original version of the hymn of the soviet union glorified stalin so heavily 
that after his death in one nine five three entire sections of the anthem had 
to be replaced or removed orwell could have also been referring to napoleon 
bonaparte s banning of the french national hymn la marseillaise in one seven 
nine nine napoleon s dealing with mr frederick who eventually betrays animal 
farm and destroys the windmill though animal farm repels the human attack many 
animals are wounded and killed stalin s molotov ribbentrop pact with nazi 
germany in one nine three nine which was later betrayed in one nine four one 
when hitler invaded the soviet union though the soviet union won the war it 
came at a tremendous price of roughly eight five one five million soviet 
soldiers unconfirmed and many civilians coming to an incredible estimated two 
zero million dead as well as the utter destruction of the western soviet union 
and its prized collective farms which stalin had created in the one nine three 
zero s napoleon s later alliance with the humans stalin s non aggression pact 
with hitler in the early years of wwii napoleon s changing animal farm back to 
manor the red army s name was changed from the workers and peasants red army to 
the soviet army to appear as a more appealing and professional organization 
rather than an army of the common people after old major dies his skull is 
placed on display on a tree stump similarly lenin s whom old major is based on 
along with karl marx embalmed body was put on display in lenin s tomb in red 
square postmortem where it still remains squealer constantly changing the 
commandments is said to be a reference to a perversion in russian religious 
history as observed by leo tolstoy when the essential precepts of the sermon on 
the mount were altered by russian orthodox church it may also refer to the 
revision of history texts to glorify stalin during his regime characters the 
events and characters in animal farm are all carefully drawn to represent the 
history of the soviet union orwell makes this explicit in the case of napoleon 
whom he directly connects to stalin in a letter of one seven march one nine 
four five to the publisher when the windmill is blown up i wrote all the 
animals including napoleon flung themselves on their faces i would like to 
alter it to all the animals except napoleon if that has been printed it s not 
worth bothering about but i just thought the alteration would be fair to js 
joseph stalin as he did stay in moscow during the german advance the other 
characters have their analogies in the real world but care should be taken with 
these comparisons as they do not always match history exactly and often simply 
represent generalised concepts the pigs napoleon the pig who becomes the leader 
of animal farm post rebellion created based on the actions of joseph stalin he 
uses his military of nine attack dogs to cement his power through fear napoleon 
craftily drives out his opponent snowball snowball the pig who fights napoleon 
for control post rebellion inspired by leon trotsky snowball is a passionate 
intellectual and is far more honest about his motives than napoleon snowball 
easily wins the loyalty of most of the animals trotsky was driven into exile in 
mexico where he was assassinated squealer the pig who serves as public speaker 
inspired by vyacheslav molotov and the russian paper pravda squealer twists and 
abuses the language to excuse justify and extol napoleon s actions no matter 
how egregious all his life george orwell made it a point to show how 
politicians used language squealer limits the debate by complicating it and he 
confuses and disorients making claims that the pigs need the extra luxury they 
are taking in order to function properly to squeal is to betray something 
squealer does often to his fellow animals minimus a poet pig who writes a song 
about napoleon representing admirers of stalin both inside and outside the ussr 
such as maxim gorky old major as a fellow socialist orwell agreed with some of 
karl marx s politics and even respected vladimir lenin in fact the satire in 
animal farm is not of marxism or lenin s revolution but of the corruption that 
occurred later major who is based upon both lenin and marx is the inspiration 
which fuels the rest of the book though it is a positive image orwell does slip 
some flaws in old major such as how during his complaints about the abuse of 
animals he admits that he has been largely free from those terrors pinkeye a 
small piglet who tastes napoleon s food for poisoning piglets while not truly 
noted in the novel these piglets are hinted to be the children of napoleon and 
are the first generation of animals to actually be subjugated to his idea of 
animal inequality the humans mr jones the original owner of manor farm he is 
probably based on tsar nicholas ii mr frederick the tough owner of pinchfield a 
well kept neighbouring farm he is probably based on germany and or adolf hitler 
mr pilkington the easy going but crafty owner of foxwood a neighbouring farm he 
represents britain and or winston churchill mr whymper a human whom napoleon 
hires to represent animal farm in human society he is loosely based on george 
bernard shaw who visited the ussr in one nine three one and praised what he 
found the other animals boxer possibly one of the more popular characters boxer 
is the tragic avatar of the working class or proletariat loyal dedicated and 
strong his major flaw however is his blind trust of the leaders and his 
inability to see corruption he is used and abused by the pigs as much or more 
than he was by jones his death serves to show just how far the pigs are willing 
to go a strong and loyal draft horse boxer played a huge part in keeping the 
farm together prior to his death boxer could also represent a stakhanovite his 
name is a reference to the boxer rebellion clover boxer s close friend and also 
a draft horse she blames herself for forgetting the original seven commandments 
when squealer revises them she represents the middle class educated people who 
acquiesce to the subversion of principles by the powerful mollie a horse who 
likes wearing ribbons which represent luxury and being pampered by humans she 
represents upper class people the bourgeoisie who fled from the u s s r after 
the russian revolution benjamin a donkey who is cynical about the revolution he 
is said to be inspired by orwell himself he represented the skeptical people in 
and out of russia who believed that communism would not help the people of 
russia moses a tame raven who spreads stories of sugarcandy mountain the animal 
heaven these beliefs are denounced by the pigs moses represents religion 
specifically the russian orthodox church which has always been in conflict with 
communism it is interesting to note that while moses initially leaves the farm 
after the rebellion he later returns and is supported by the pigs this 
represents the cynical use of religion by the state to anaesthetise the minds 
of the masses muriel a goat who reads the edited commandments she may represent 
intelligent labour jessie and bluebell two dogs who give birth in chapter iii 
their puppies are nurtured by napoleon to inspire fear without doubt 
representing the formation of the nkvd kgb the hens represent the kulaks landed 
peasants persecuted by stalin the dogs napoleon s secret police and bodyguards 
inspired by cheka nkvd ogpu mvd the sheep the sheep show the dumb animal 
following of the proletariats in the midst of the russian civil war four legs 
good two legs bad significance the book is an allegory about the events 
following the revolution in the soviet union and in particular the rise of 
stalinism and the betrayal of the revolution which basically replaced one 
dictatorship for another orwell wrote the book following his experiences during 
the spanish civil war which are described in another of his books homage to 
catalonia he intended it to be a strong condemnation of what he saw as the 
stalinist corruption of the original socialist ideals in which he believed and 
continued to believe after he saw a revolution betrayed as in spain for the 
preface of a ukrainian edition he prepared in one nine four seven orwell 
describes what gave him the idea of setting the book on a farm i saw a little 
boy perhaps ten years old driving a huge cart horse along a narrow path 
whipping it whenever it tried to turn it struck me that if only such animals 
became aware of their strength we should have no power over them and that men 
exploit animals in much the same way as the rich exploit the proletariat this 
ukrainian edition was an early propaganda use of the book it was printed to be 
distributed among the soviet citizens of ukraine who were just some of the many 
millions of displaced persons throughout europe at the end of the second world 
war the american occupation forces did not appreciate these illegal presses 
printing propaganda and confiscated one five zero zero copies of animal farm 
handing them to the soviet authorities the politics in the book also affected 
britain with orwell reporting that ernest bevin was terrified that it may cause 
embarrassment if published before the one nine four five general election in 
recent years the book has been used to compare new movements that overthrow 
heads of a corrupt and undemocratic government or organization only to become 
corrupt and oppressive themselves over time as they succumb to the trappings of 
power and begin using violent and dictatorial methods to keep it such analogies 
have been used for many former african colonies such as zimbabwe and democratic 
republic of congo whose succeeding african born rulers were thought to be as 
corrupt as the european colonists they supplanted in schools animal farm is 
used in the core knowledge curriculum core knowledge is based on the 
interaction of different subjects in schools the way animal farm comes into 
play is that if a student s geography or history class is learning about the 
former soviet union the english class will be reading animal farm post 
publication views of the book in the post war years it became apparent to 
orwell that anti russian literature was not something which most major 
publishing houses would touch including his regular publisher gollancz one 
publisher he sought to sell his book to rejected it on the grounds of 
government advice although it was later found that the civil servant who gave 
the order was a soviet spy orwell originally prepared a preface on freedom of 
the press for the book which noted the sinister fact about literary censorship 
in england is that it is largely voluntary things are kept right out of the 
british press not because the government intervened but because of a general 
tacit agreement that it wouldn t do to mention that particular fact somewhat 
ironically the preface itself was censored and is not published with most 
copies of the book film versions the book was the basis of an animated feature 
film in one nine five five britain s first full length animated movie directed 
by john halas and joy batchelor and quietly commissioned by the american cia 
which softened the theme of the story slightly by reducing the role of moses 
the character representing religion and adding an epilogue that occurs 
immediately after the novel s iconic concluding imagery is depicted where the 
other animals successfully revolt against the pigs there was also a one nine 
nine nine live action film directed by john stephenson with voices by kelsey 
grammer as snowball patrick stewart as napoleon and ian holm as squealer 
despite a few differences such as completely different songs and jesse being 
the first to question the pigs much of the plot is loyal to the book the film 
diverges from the book with an additional epilogue in which jesse and several 
animals escape and return years later to a post napoleon era animal farm 
cultural references pink floyd s one nine seven seven album animals was 
partially inspired by animal farm it categorises people as pigs dogs or sheep 
in an episode of johnny bravo aunt katie s farm johnny while dressed in a pig 
costume goes crazy and yells four legs good two legs bad over and over radical 
socialist rappers dead prez released a song called animal in man off their 
debut lp let s get free re telling the story a song off canadian band protest 
the hero s debut cd a calculated use of sound called red stars over the battle 
of the cowshed is presumably a reference to animal farm see also songs beasts 
of england comrade napoleon battles battle of the cowshed battle of the 
windmill characters old major napoleon snowball squealer frederick pilkington 
jones boxer the seven commandments seven commandments references external links 
animal farm cliffsnotes slashdoc animal farm analytical essays of the novel 
animal farm searchable indexed etext animal farm complete novel includes 
publication data and search feature excerpts from orwell s letters to his agent 
concerning animal farm george orwell web ring imdb animal farm one nine five 
four animated film imdb animal farm one nine nine nine tv film isbn numbers 
isbn nine nine six six four seven two four eight seven paperback one nine eight 
eight swahili translation isbn zero five eight two zero two one seven three one 
paper text one nine eight nine isbn zero one five one zero seven two five five 
eight hardcover one nine nine zero isbn zero five eight two zero six zero one 
zero nine paper text one nine nine one isbn zero six seven nine four two zero 
three nine eight hardcover one nine nine three isbn zero six zero six zero zero 
one zero two six prebound one nine nine six isbn zero one five one zero zero 
two one seven seven hardcover one nine nine six anniversary edition isbn zero 
four five two two seven seven five zero seven paperback one nine nine six 
anniversary edition isbn zero four five one five two six three four one mass 
market paperback one nine nine six anniversary edition isbn zero five eight two 
five three zero zero eight three one nine nine six isbn one five six zero zero 
zero five two zero three cloth text one nine nine eight large type edition isbn 
zero seven nine one zero four seven seven four one hardcover one nine nine nine 
isbn zero four five one five two five three six one paperback one nine nine 
nine isbn zero seven six four one zero eight one nine zero paperback one nine 
nine nine isbn zero eight two two zero seven zero zero nine x e book one nine 
nine nine isbn zero seven five eight seven seven eight four three zero 
hardcover two zero zero two isbn zero one five one zero one zero two six nine 
hardcover two zero zero three with nineteen eighty four isbn zero four five two 
two eight four two four four paperback two zero zero three centennial edition 
isbn zero eight four eight eight zero one two zero two hardcover one nine four 
five books animal farm dystopian novels english novels george orwell books 
modern library one zero zero best novels satirical books time magazine one zero 
zero best novels twentieth century british novels amphibians class amphibia are 
a taxon of animals that include all tetrapods four legged vertebrates that do 
not have amniotic eggs amphibians from greek both and life generally spend part 
of their time on land but they do not have the adaptations to an entirely 
terrestrial existence found in most other modern tetrapods amniotes there are 
about five nine five zero described living species of amphibians the study of 
amphibians and reptiles is known as herpetology history of amphibians fire 
salamander salamandra salamandra amphibians developed with the characteristics 
of pharyngeal slits gills a dorsal nerve cord a notochord and a post anal tail 
at different stages of their life they have persisted since the dawn of 
tetrapods three nine zero million years ago in the devonian period when they 
were the first four legged animals to develop lungs during the following 
carboniferous period they also developed the ability to walk on land to avoid 
aquatic competition and predation while allowing them to travel from water 
source to water source as a group they maintained the status of the dominant 
animal for nearly seven five million years throughout their history they have 
ranged in size from the three foot nine zero cm long devonian ichthyostega to 
the slightly larger five foot one five zero cm long permian eryops and down to 
the tiny brachycephalus didactylus brazilian gold frog and eleutherodactylus 
iberia from cuba with a total length of nine six nine eight millimeters zero 
four inches amphibians have mastered almost every climate on earth from the 
hottest deserts to the frozen arctic classification caecilian from the san 
antonio zoo traditionally the amphibians are taken to include all tetrapods 
that are not amniotes recent amphibians all belong to a single subgroup of 
these called the lissamphibia recently there has been a tendency to restrict 
the class amphibia to the lissamphibia i e to exclude tetrapods that are not 
more closely related to modern forms than they are to modern reptiles birds and 
mammals there are two ancient extinct subclasses subclass labyrinthodontia 
paraphyletic subclass lepospondyli of the remaining modern subclass 
lissamphibia there are three orders order anura frogs and toads in superorder 
salientia five two two eight species order caudata or urodela salamanders five 
five two species order gymnophiona or apoda caecilians one seven one species 
authorities disagree on whether salientia is a superorder that includes the 
order anura or whether anura is a sub order of the order salientia in effect 
salientia includes all the anura plus a single triassic proto frog species 
triadobatrachus massinoti practical considerations seem to favour using the 
former arrangement now reproduction for the purpose of reproduction most 
amphibians are bound to fresh water a few tolerate brackish water but there are 
no true sea water amphibians several hundred frog species in adaptive 
radiations e g eleutherodactylus the pacific platymantines the australo papuan 
microhylids and many other tropical frogs however do not need any water 
whatsoever they reproduce via direct development an ecological and evolutionary 
adaptation that has allowed them to be completely independent from free 
standing water almost all of these frogs live in wet tropical rainforests and 
their eggs hatch directly into miniature versions of the adult bypassing the 
tadpole stage entirely several species have also adapted to arid and semi arid 
environments but most of them still need water to lay their eggs symbiosis with 
single celled algae that lives in the jelly like layer of the eggs has evolved 
several times the larvae tadpoles or polliwogs breathe with exterior gills 
after hatching they start to transform gradually into the adult s appearance 
this process is called metamorphosis typically the animals then leave the water 
and become terrestrial adults but there are many interesting exceptions to this 
general way of reproduction the most obvious part of the amphibian 
metamorphosis is the formation of four legs in order to support the body on 
land but there are several other changes the gills are replaced by other 
respiratory organs i e lungs the skin changes and develops glands to avoid 
dehydration the eyes get eyelids and adapt to vision outside the water an 
eardrum is developed to lock the middle ear in frogs and toads the tail 
disappears amphibian conservation the golden toad of monteverde costa rica was 
among the first casualties of amphibian declines formerly abundant it was last 
seen in one nine eight nine dramatic declines in amphibian populations 
including population crashes and mass localized extinction have been noted in 
the past two decades from locations all over the world and amphibian declines 
are thus perceived as one of the most critical threats to global biodiversity a 
number of causes are believed to be involved including habitat destruction and 
modification over exploitation pollution introduced species climate change and 
disease however many of the causes of amphibian declines are still poorly 
understood and amphibian declines are currently a topic of much ongoing 
research see also frog zoology prehistoric amphibian tetrapod references 
duellman trueb biology of amphibians coauthors mart n r bustamante luis a 
coloma jamie a consuegra michael p l fogden pru n foster enrique la marca karen 
l masters andr s merino viteri robert puschendorf santiago r ron g arturo s 
nchez azofeifa christopher j still and bruce e young solomon berg martin 
biology external links american museum of natural history department of 
herpetology the global amphibian assessment amphibiaweb chordates amphibians 
alaska ipa is the four nine th state of the united states it was admitted on 
january three one nine five nine the population of the state is six two six 
nine three two as of two zero zero zero according to the two zero zero zero u s 
census alaska is most likely ranked the fourth smallest state population wise 
in the u s with wyoming vermont and by now north dakota smaller than alaska the 
name alaska is most likely derived from the aleut word alyeska meaning greater 
land as opposed to the aleut word aleutia meaning lesser land to the aleuts 
this distinction was a linguistic variation distinguishing the mainland from an 
island it is bordered by yukon territory and british columbia canada to the 
east the gulf of alaska and the pacific ocean to the south the bering sea 
bering strait and chukchi sea to the west and the beaufort sea and the arctic 
ocean to the north alaska is the largest state by area in the united states it 
is larger in area than all but one eight of the world s nations history alaska 
was first inhabited by humans who came across the bering land bridge eventually 
alaska became populated by the inupiaq inuit and yupik eskimos aleuts and a 
variety of american indian groups most if not all of the pre columbian 
population of the americas probably took this route and continued further south 
and east the first written accounts indicate that the first europeans to reach 
alaska came from russia vitus bering sailed east and saw mt st elias the 
russian american company hunted sea otters for their fur the colony was never 
very profitable because of the costs of transportation at the urging of u s 
secretary of state william seward the united states senate approved the 
purchase of alaska from russia for seven two zero zero zero zero zero 
approximately one three four zero zero zero zero zero zero in two zero zero 
five dollars adjusted for inflation on nine april one eight six seven and the 
united states flag was raised on one eight october of that same year now called 
alaska day coincident with the ownership change the de facto international date 
line was moved westward and alaska changed from the julian calendar to the 
gregorian calendar therefore for residents friday october six one eight six 
seven was followed by friday october one eight one eight six seven two fridays 
in a row because of the date line shift the first american administrator of 
alaska was polish immigrant w odzimierz krzy anowski the purchase was not 
popular in the contiguous united states where alaska became known as seward s 
folly or seward s icebox alaska celebrates the purchase each year on the last 
monday of march calling it seward s day after the purchase of alaska between 
one eight six seven and one eight eight four the name was changed to the 
department of alaska between one eight eight four and one nine one two it was 
called the district of alaska president dwight d eisenhower signed the alaska 
statehood act into united states law on seven july one nine five eight which 
paved the way for alaska s admission into the union on january three one nine 
five nine alaska suffered one of the worst earthquakes in recorded north 
american history on good friday one nine six four see good friday earthquake in 
one nine seven six the people of alaska amended the state s constitution 
establishing the alaska permanent fund the fund invests a portion of the state 
s mineral revenue including revenue from the trans alaskan pipeline system to 
benefit all generations of alaskans in march two zero zero five the fund s 
value was over three zero billion prior to one nine eight three the state lay 
across four different time zones pacific standard time utc eight hours in the 
southeast panhandle a small area of yukon standard time utc nine hours around 
yakutat alaska hawaii standard time utc one zero hours in the anchorage and 
fairbanks vicinity with the nome area and most of the aleutian islands 
observing bering standard time utc one one hours in one nine eight three the 
number of time zones was reduced to two with the entire mainland plus the inner 
aleutian islands going to utc nine hours and this zone then being renamed 
alaska standard time as the yukon territory had several years earlier circa one 
nine seven five adopted a single time zone identical to pacific standard time 
and the remaining aleutian islands were slotted into the utc one zero hours 
zone which was then renamed hawaii aleutian standard time over the years 
various vessels have been named uss alaska in honor of the state during world 
war ii three of the outer aleutian islands attu agattu and kiska were occupied 
by japanese troops it was the only territory within the current borders of the 
united states to have land occupied during the war politics alaska is often 
characterized as a republican leaning state with strong libertarian tendencies 
local political communities often work on issues related to land use 
development fishing tourism and individual rights as many residents are proud 
of their rough alaskan heritage alaska natives while organized in and around 
their communities are often active within the native corporations which have 
been given ownership over large tracts of land and thus need to deliberate 
resource conservation and development issues in presidential elections the 
state s electoral college votes have been most often won by a republican 
nominee only once has alaska supported a democratic nominee when it supported 
lyndon b johnson in the landslide year of one nine six four although the one 
nine six zero and one nine six eight elections were close no state has voted 
for a democratic presidential candidate fewer times president george w bush won 
the state s electoral votes in two zero zero four by a margin of two five 
percentage points with six one one of the vote juneau stands out as an area 
that supports democratic candidates when the united states congress in one nine 
five seven and one nine five eight debated the wisdom of admitting it as the 
four nine th state much of the political debate centered on whether alaska 
would become a democratic or republican leaning state conventional wisdom had 
it that with its rugged individualism penchant for new ideas and dependence on 
the federal government largess for basic needs it would become a democratic 
stronghold about which republicans and the then republican administration of 
dwight eisenhower had reservations given time those fears proved roundly 
unfounded after an early flirtatious period with liberal politics the political 
climate of alaska changed quickly once petroleum was discovered and the federal 
government came to be seen as meddling in local affairs still despite its 
libertarian leanings the state regularly takes in more federal money than it 
gives out a fact that can be attributed at least partially to its equal 
representation in the united states senate in recent years the alaska 
legislature is a two zero member senate serving four year terms and four zero 
member house serving two year terms it has been dominated by conservatives 
generally republicans likewise recent state governors have been mostly 
conservatives although not always elected under the official party banner 
republican wally hickel was elected to the office for a second term in one nine 
nine zero after jumping the republican ship and briefly joining the alaskan 
independence party ticket just long enough to be reelected he subsequently 
officially rejoined the republican fold in one nine nine four alaska s members 
of the u s congress are all republican u s senator ted stevens was appointed to 
the position following the death of u s senator bob bartlett in december of one 
nine six eight and has never lost a re election campaign since as the longest 
serving republican in the senate some political wits call him senator for life 
stevens has been a crucial force in gaining federal money for his state until 
his resignation from the u s senate to run for governor republican frank 
murkowski held the state s other senatorial position and as governor was 
allowed to appoint his daughter lisa murkowski as his successor she won a full 
six year term on her own in two zero zero four alaska s sole u s house 
representative don young won re election to his one seven th straight term also 
in two zero zero four his seniority in house ranks him as one of the most 
influential republican house members his position on the house transportation 
committee allowed him to parlay some four five zero million to two bridge 
projects in alaska named the bridges to nowhere for which he gained national 
notoriety following the devastation in the state of louisiana following 
hurricane katrina and his insistence that the money not be returned to aid in 
rebuilding the gulf coast geography near little port walter alaska is one of 
the two states that is not bordered by another us state hawaii being the other 
it is the only state that is both in north america and is not part of the four 
eight contiguous states about five zero zero miles eight zero zero kilometers 
of canadian territory separate alaska from washington therefore alaska is an 
exclave of the united states that is part of the continental u s but is not 
part of the contiguous u s it is also the only mainland state whose capital 
city is accessible only via ship or air there are no roads connecting juneau to 
the rest of the state alaska is the largest state in the united states in terms 
of land area five seven zero three seven four square miles one four seven seven 
two six one km if a map of alaska were superimposed upon a map of the 
continental united states alaska would overlap texas oklahoma kansas new mexico 
and colorado alaska has the longest coastline of any state one scheme for 
describing the state s geography is by labeling the regions south central 
alaska is the southern coastal region and is the population center for the 
state the municipality of anchorage and many small but growing towns such as 
palmer and wasilla lie within this area petroleum industrial plants 
transportation tourism and two military bases form the core of the economy here 
the alaska panhandle also known as southeast alaska is home to juneau many 
small towns tidewater glaciers and extensive forests tourism fishing forestry 
and state government anchor the economy the alaska interior is home to 
fairbanks the geography is marked by large braided rivers such as the yukon 
river and the kuskokwim river as well as arctic tundra lands and shorelines the 
alaskan bush is the remote less crowded part of the state encompassing three 
eight zero native villages and small towns such as nome bethel kotzebue and 
most famously barrow the northernmost town in the united states the northeast 
corner of alaska is covered by the arctic national wildlife refuge which covers 
one nine zero four nine two three six acres seven nine three one eight km with 
its numerous islands alaska has nearly three four zero zero zero miles five 
four seven zero zero km of tidal shoreline the island chain extending west from 
the southern tip of the alaska peninsula is called the aleutian islands many 
active volcanoes are found in the aleutians for example unimak island is home 
to mount shishaldin a moderately active volcano that rises to nine nine eight 
zero ft three zero four two m above sea level the chain of volcanoes extends to 
mount spurr west of anchorage on the mainland north america s second largest 
tides occur in turnagain arm just south of anchorage which often sees tidal 
differences of more than three five feet one zero seven m alaska is home to 
three five million lakes of two zero acres eight ha or larger marshlands and 
wetland permafrost cover one eight eight three two zero square miles four eight 
seven seven four seven km mostly in northern western and southwest flatlands 
frozen water in the form of glacier ice covers some one six zero zero zero 
square miles four one four four zero km of land and one two zero zero square 
miles three one zero eight km of tidal zone the bering glacier complex near the 
southeastern border with yukon canada covers two two five zero square miles 
five eight two seven km alone the aleutian islands actually cross longitude one 
eight zero also making it the easternmost state although the international date 
line doglegs around them to keep the whole state in the same day it is part of 
the extreme points of the united states according to the october one nine nine 
eight report of the united states bureau of land management approximately six 
five of alaska is owned and managed by the u s federal government as national 
forests national parks and national wildlife refuges of these the bureau of 
land management manages eight seven million acres three five zero zero zero 
zero km or two three eight of the state the arctic national wildlife refuge is 
managed by the united states fish and wildlife service of the remaining land 
area the state of alaska owns two four five another one zero is managed by 
thirteen regional and dozens of local native corporations created under the 
alaska native claims settlement act various private interests own the remaining 
land totaling less than one see also list of alaska rivers alaska peninsula 
bristol bay boroughs and census areas alaska has no counties in the sense used 
in the rest of the country instead the state is divided into two seven census 
areas and boroughs the difference between boroughs and census areas is that 
boroughs have an organized area wide government while census areas are 
artificial divisions defined by the united states census bureau for statistical 
purposes only areas of the state not in organized boroughs compose what the 
government of alaska calls the unorganized borough borough level government 
services in the unorganized borough are provided by the state itself economy 
greetings from alaska the state s two zero zero three total gross state product 
was three one billion its per capita income for two zero zero three was three 
three two one three one four th in the nation alaska s main export is seafood 
agriculture represents only a fraction of the alaska economy agricultural 
production is primarily for consumption within the state and includes nursery 
stock dairy products vegetables and livestock manufacturing is limited with 
most foodstuffs and general goods imported from elsewhere employment is 
primarily in government and industries such as natural resource extraction 
shipping and transportation military bases are a significant component of the 
economy in both fairbanks and anchorage its industrial outputs are crude 
petroleum natural gas coal gold precious metals zinc and other mining seafood 
processing timber and wood products there is also a growing service and tourism 
sector tourists have contributed to the economy by supporting local lodging the 
cost of goods in alaska has long been higher than in the contiguous four eight 
states this has changed for the most part in anchorage and fairbanks where the 
cost of living is actually less than some major cities in the lower four eight 
thanks to lower housing and transportation costs the introduction of big box 
stores in anchorage fairbanks and juneau also did much to lower prices however 
rural alaska suffers from extremely high prices for food and consumer goods 
compared to the rest of the country due to the relatively limited 
transportation infrastructure many rural residents come in to these cities and 
purchase food and goods in bulk from warehouse clubs like costco and sam s club 
some have embraced the free shipping offers of some online retailers to 
purchase items much more cheaply than they could in their own communities if 
they are available at all transportation bridge on alaska highway between 
watson lake and whitehorse alaska is arguably the least connected state in 
terms of road transportation the state s road system covers a relatively small 
area of the state linking the central population centers and the alaska highway 
the principal route out of the state through canada the state capital juneau is 
not accessible by road which has spurred several debates over the decades about 
moving the capital to a city on the road system one unique feature of the road 
system is the anton anderson memorial tunnel which links the seward highway 
south of anchorage with the relatively isolated community of whittier the 
tunnel held the title of the longest road tunnel in north america at nearly two 
five miles four km until completion of the three five mile five six km 
interstate nine three tunnel as part of the big dig project in boston 
massachusetts the anderson tunnel combines a one lane roadway and train tracks 
in the same housing consequently eastbound traffic westbound traffic and the 
alaska railroad must share the tunnel resulting in waits of two zero minutes or 
more to enter as reflected on the alaska department of transportation tunnel 
website it is now considered north america s longest railroad highway tunnel 
the alaska railroad runs from seward through anchorage denali and fairbanks to 
north pole with spurs to whittier and palmer the railroad is famous for its 
summertime passenger services but also plays a vital part in moving alaska s 
natural resources such as coal and gravel to ports in anchorage whittier and 
seward the alaska railroad is the only remaining railroad in north america to 
use cabooses on its freight trains a stretch of the track along an area 
inaccessible by road serves as the only transportation to cabins in the area 
most cities and villages in the state are accessible only by sea or air alaska 
has a well developed ferry system known as the alaska marine highway which 
serves the cities of southeast and the alaska peninsula the system also 
operates a ferry service from bellingham washington up the inside passage to 
skagway cities not served by road or sea can only be reached by air accounting 
for alaska s extremely well developed bush air services an alaskan novelty 
anchorage itself and to a lesser extent fairbanks are serviced by many major 
airlines air travel is the cheapest and most efficient form of transportation 
in and out of the state anchorage recently completed extensive remodeling and 
construction at ted stevens anchorage international airport to help accommodate 
the upsurge in tourism unofficial sources have estimated the numbers for two 
zero zero four at some four million tourists arriving in alaska between may and 
september however regular flights to most villages and towns within the state 
are commercially challenging to provide alaska airlines is the only major 
airline offering in state travel with jet service sometimes in combination 
cargo and passenger boeing seven three seven two zero zero s from anchorage and 
fairbanks to regional hubs like bethel nome kotzebue dillingham kodiak and 
other larger communities as well as to major southeast and alaska peninsula 
communities the bulk of remaining commercial flight offerings come from small 
regional commuter airlines like era aviation penair and frontier flying service 
the smallest towns and villages must rely on scheduled or chartered bush flying 
services using general aviation aircraft such as the cessna caravan the most 
popular aircraft in use in the state much of this service can be attributed to 
the alaska bypass mail program which subsidizes bulk mail delivery to alaskan 
rural communities the program requires seven zero of that subsidy to go to 
carriers who offer passenger service to the communities but perhaps the most 
quintessentially alaskan plane is the bush seaplane the world s busiest 
seaplane base is lake hood located next to ted stevens anchorage international 
airport where flights bound for remote villages without an airstrip carry 
passengers cargo and lots of items from stores and warehouse clubs another 
alaskan transportation method is the dogsled in modern times dog mushing is 
more of a sport than a true means of transportation various races are held 
around the state but the best known is the iditarod a one one five zero mile 
one eight five zero km trail from anchorage to nome the race commemorates the 
famous one nine two five serum run to nome in which mushers and dogs like balto 
took much needed medicine to the diphtheria stricken community of nome when all 
other means of transportation had failed mushers from all over the world come 
to anchorage each march to compete for cash prizes and prestige demographics as 
of two zero zero five alaska has an estimated population of six six three six 
six one which is an increase of five nine zero six or zero nine from the prior 
year and an increase of three six seven three zero or five nine since the year 
two zero zero zero this includes a natural increase since the last census of 
three six five nine zero people derived from its five three one three two 
births of which one six five four two deaths is subtracted from and an increase 
due to net migration of one one eight one people into the state immigration 
from outside the united states resulted in a net increase of five eight zero 
zero people and migration within the country produced a net loss of four six 
one nine people alaska is the least densely populated state race and ancestry 
the racial breakdown of the state is six seven six white non hispanic one five 
six native american or alaska native four one hispanic four asian three five 
black five four mixed race the largest ancestry groups in the state are german 
one six six alaska native or american indian one five six irish one zero eight 
english nine six american five seven and norwegian four two alaska has the 
largest percentage of american indians one six of any state the vast sparsely 
populated bush regions of northern and western alaska are primarily inhabited 
by alaska natives and they also have a large presence in the southeast 
anchorage fairbanks and other parts of south central and southeast alaska have 
many whites of northern and western european ancestry the wrangell petersburg 
area has many residents of scandinavian ancestry and the aleutians have many 
filipinos most of the state s black population lives in anchorage as of two 
zero zero zero eight five seven of alaska residents age five and older speak 
english at home and five two speak native american languages spanish speakers 
make up two nine of the population followed by tagalog speakers at one five and 
korean at zero eight religion christian eight one protestant six eight baptist 
one one lutheran eight methodist six pentecostal two episcopal one quaker one 
orthodox eight catholic seven latter day saint one other religions one not 
religious agnostic one seven notable is alaska s relatively large eastern 
orthodox christian population a result of early russian colonization and 
missionary work among indigenous alaskans social issues alaska has long had a 
problem with alcohol use and abuse many rural communities in alaska have 
outlawed its import dry wet and damp are terms describing a community s laws on 
liquor consumption this problem directly relates to alaska s high rate of fetal 
alcohol syndrome fas as well as contributing to the high rate of suicides this 
is a controversial topic for many residents alaska has also had a problem with 
brain drain as many of its young people including most of the highest academic 
achievers leave the state upon graduating high school while for many this 
functions as a sort of walkabout many do not return to the state the university 
of alaska has been successfully combating this by offering four year 
scholarships to the top one zero percent of alaska high school graduates the 
alaska scholars program domestic abuse and other violent crimes are also at 
notoriously high levels in the state this is in part linked to alcohol abuse 
notable alaskans the national statuary hall of the united states of america is 
part of the capitol in washington d c each state has selected one or two 
distinguished citizens and provided statues alaska s are of its first two 
senators edward lewis bob bartlett one nine zero four one nine six eight was 
the territorial delegate to the us congress from one nine four four to one nine 
five eight and was elected as the first senior u s senator in one nine five 
eight and re elected in one nine six four there are streets buildings and even 
the first state ferry named for him ernest gruening one eight eight six one 
nine seven four was appointed governor of the territory of alaska in one nine 
three nine and served in that position for fourteen years he was elected to the 
united states senate in one nine five eight and re elected in one nine six two 
jay hammond one nine two two two zero zero five was governor during the 
building of the alaska pipeline and established the alaska permanent fund 
providing alaskans with essentially free money he is regarded as somewhat of a 
hero because of this he was also governor during passage of the alaska national 
interest lands conservation act and effectively served to moderate associated 
issues within the state among disparate interest groups ranging from 
conservationists to natives to pro development interests fran ulmer was the 
first woman elected to statewide office she became lieutenant governor in one 
nine nine four george sharrock one nine one zero two zero zero five moved to 
the territory before statehood eventually elected as the mayor of anchorage and 
served during the good friday earthquake in march one nine six four this was 
the most devastating earthquake to hit alaska and it sunk beach property 
damaged roads and destroyed buildings all over the south central area sharrock 
sometimes called the earthquake mayor led the city s rebuilding effort over six 
months important cities and towns alaska s most populous city is anchorage home 
of two six zero two eight three people two two five seven four four of whom 
live in the urbanized area it ranks third in the list of u s cities by area 
behind two other alaskan cities sitka ranks as america s largest city by area 
followed closely by juneau sitka town two five richest places in alaska ranked 
by per capita income see also richest places in alaska colleges and 
universities university of alaska system university of alaska anchorage 
university of alaska fairbanks university of alaska southeast alaska bible 
college alaska pacific university charter college ilisagvik college sheldon 
jackson college external links state of alaska website us census bureau alaska 
com information alaska travel industry association alaska newspapers political 
parties alaska republican party alaska democratic party alaska republican 
moderate party alaskan independence party alaska libertarian party alaska green 
party alaska exclaves russian people in the united states states of the united 
states one nine five nine establishments in modern usage architecture is the 
art of creating an actual implied or apparent plan of any complex object or 
system the term can be used to connote the implied architecture of abstract 
things such as music or mathematics the apparent architecture of natural things 
such as geological formations or the structure of biological cells or 
explicitly planned architectures of human made things such as software 
computers enterprises and databases in addition to buildings in every usage an 
architecture may be seen as a subjective mapping from a human perspective that 
of the user in the case of abstract or physical artifacts to the elements or 
components of some kind of structure or system which preserves the 
relationships among the elements components architecture may refer to 
architecture built environment the art and science of designing habitations 
buildings and building complexes classical architecture architectural history 
studies the evolution and history of built architectures across the world 
through a consideration of various influences artistic cultural political 
economic and technological architecture other a representation of an arbitrary 
abstract natural or man made structure of two or more interacting parts e g 
architecture of mathematics architecture of language cytoarchitecture cellular 
architecture naval architecture skelletal architecture battlefield architecture 
all systems can be said to have an architecture biological architectures the 
apparent architecture of biological structures see cytoarchitecture structural 
biology cell architecture landscape architecture the design of man made land 
constructs systems architecture the representation of an engineered or to be 
engineered system and the process and discipline for effectively implementing 
the design s for such a system such a system may consist of information and or 
hardware and or software computer architecture the systems architecture of a 
computer software architecture the systems architecture of a software system 
enterprise architecture a systems architecture or framework for aligning an 
organization s structure processes information operations projects with the 
organization s overall strategy information architecture a systems architecture 
for structuring a knowledge based system product design or product architecture 
the systems design of a product or product family vehicle architecture an 
automobile platform made from a set of components common to a number of 
different vehicles a farmer in germany working the land in the traditional way 
with horse and plough farming the modern way using a tractor in sweden 
agriculture is the process of producing food feed fiber and many other desired 
products by the cultivation of certain plants and the raising of domesticated 
animals livestock the practice of agriculture is also known as farming while 
scientists inventors and others devoted to improving farming methods and 
implements are also said to be engaged in agriculture more people in the world 
are involved in agriculture as their primary economic activity than in any 
other yet it only accounts for four percent of the world s gdp overview tea 
plantation in java indonesia agriculture sometimes refers to subsistence 
agriculture the production of enough food to meet just the needs of the farmer 
agriculturalist and his her family it may also refer to industrial agriculture 
often referred to as factory farming long prevalent in developed nations and 
increasingly so elsewhere which consists of obtaining financial income from the 
cultivation of land to yield produce the commercial raising of animals animal 
husbandry or both agriculture is also short for the study of the practice of 
agriculture more formally known as agricultural science agricultural students 
are known sometimes derisively as aggies increasingly in addition to food for 
humans and animal feeds agriculture produces goods such as cut flowers 
ornamental and nursery plants timber or lumber fertilizers animal hides leather 
industrial chemicals starch sugar ethanol alcohols and plastics fibers cotton 
wool hemp and flax fuels methane from biomass biodiesel and both legal and 
illegal drugs biopharmaceuticals tobacco marijuana opium cocaine genetically 
engineered plants and animals produce specialty drugs in the western world the 
use of gene manipulation better management of soil nutrients and improved weed 
control have greatly increased yields per unit area at the same time the use of 
mechanization has decreased labour requirements the developing world generally 
produces lower yields having less of the latest science capital and technology 
base modern agriculture depends heavily on engineering and technology and on 
the biological and physical sciences irrigation drainage conservation and 
sanitary engineering each of which is important in successful farming are some 
of the fields requiring the specialized knowledge of agricultural engineers 
agricultural chemistry deals with other vital farming concerns such as the 
application of fertilizer insecticides see pest control and fungicides soil 
makeup analysis of agricultural products and nutritional needs of farm animals 
plant breeding and genetics contribute additionally to farm productivity 
advanced seed engineering has allowed strains of seed to become perfect in 
every farming situation seeds can now germinate faster and adapt to shorter 
growing seasons in different climates present day seed can resist the spraying 
of pesticides that kill all green leaf plants hydroponics a method of soilless 
gardening in which plants are grown in chemical nutrient solutions may help 
meet the need for greater food production as the world s population increases 
the packing processing and marketing of agricultural products are closely 
related activities also influenced by science methods of quick freezing and 
dehydration have increased the markets for farm products see food preservation 
meat packing industry mechanization the outstanding characteristic of late one 
nine th and two zero th century agricultural evolution has eased much of the 
backbreaking toil of the farmer more significantly mechanization has enormously 
increased farm efficiency and productivity see agricultural machinery animals 
including horses mules oxen camels llamas alpacas and dogs however are still 
used to cultivate fields harvest crops and transport farm products to markets 
in many parts of the world airplanes helicopters trucks and tractors are used 
in agriculture for seeding spraying operations for insect and disease control 
aerial topdressing transporting perishable products and fighting forest fires 
radio and television disseminate vital weather reports and other information 
such as market reports that concern farmers computers have become an essential 
tool for farm management farming ploughing rice paddy in indonesia according to 
the national academy of engineering in the us agricultural mechanization is one 
of the two zero greatest engineering achievements of the two zero th century 
early in the century it took one american farmer to produce food for two five 
people where today due to engineering technology also plant breeding and 
agrichemicals a single farmer can feed over one three zero people this comes at 
a cost however of large amounts of energy input from unsustainable mostly 
fossil fuel sources animal husbandry means breeding and raising animals for 
meat or to harvest animal products like milk eggs or wool on a continual basis 
in recent years some aspects of industrial intensive agriculture have been the 
subject of increasing discussion the widening sphere of influence held by large 
seed and chemical companies meat packers and food processors has been a source 
of concern both within the farming community and for the general public there 
has been increased activity of some people against some farming practices 
raising chickens for food being one example another issue is the type of feed 
given to some animals that can cause bovine spongiform encephalopathy in cattle 
there has also been concern because of the disastrous effect that intensive 
agriculture has on the environment in the us for example fertilizer has been 
running off into the mississippi for years and has caused a dead spot in the 
gulf of mexico where the mississippi empties intensive agriculture also 
depletes the fertility of the land over time and the end effect is that which 
happened in the middle east were some of the most fertile farmland in the world 
was turned into a desert by intensive agriculture the patent protection given 
to companies that develop new types of seed using genetic engineering has 
allowed seed to be licensed to farmers in much the same way that computer 
software is licensed to users this has changed the balance of power in favor of 
the seed companies allowing them to dictate terms and conditions previously 
unheard of some argue these companies are guilty of biopiracy soil conservation 
and nutrient management have been important concerns since the one nine five 
zero s with the best farmers taking a stewardship role with the land they 
operate however increasing contamination of waterways and wetlands by nutrients 
like nitrogen and phosphorus are of concern in many countries increasing 
consumer awareness of agricultural issues has led to the rise of community 
supported agriculture local food movement slow food and commercial organic 
farming though these yet remain fledgling industries history ancient egyptian 
farmer main article history of agriculture archaeobotanists paleoethnobotanists 
have traced the selection and cultivation of specific food plant 
characteristics such as a semi tough rachis and larger seeds to just after the 
younger dryas about nine five zero zero bc in the early holocene in the levant 
region of the fertile crescent limited anthropological and archaeological 
evidence both indicate a grain grinding culture farming along the nile in the 
one zero th millennium bc using the world s earliest known type of sickle 
blades there is even earlier evidence for conscious cultivation and seasonal 
harvest grains of rye with domestic traits have been recovered from epi 
palaeolithic one zero zero zero zero bc contexts at abu hureyra in syria but 
this appears to be a localised phenomenon resulting from cultivation of stands 
of wild rye rather than a definitive step towards domestication it is not until 
ca eight five zero zero bc in middle eastern cultures referred to as pre 
pottery neolithic b ppnb where there is the first definite evidence for the 
emergence of a widespread subsistence economy that was dependent on 
domesticated plants and animals in these contexts lie the origins of the eight 
so called founder crops of agriculture firstly emmer wheat einkorn wheat then 
hulled barley pea lentil bitter vetch chick pea and flax these eight crops 
occur more or less simultaneously on ppnb sites in this region although the 
consensus is that wheat was the first to be sown and harvested on a significant 
scale there are many sites that date to between ca eight five zero zero bc and 
seven five zero zero bc where the systematic farming of these crops contributed 
the major part of the inhabitants diet from the fertile crescent agriculture 
spread eastwards to central asia and westwards into cyprus anatolia and by 
seven zero zero zero bc greece farming principally of emmer and einkorn reached 
northwestern europe via southeastern and central europe by ca four eight zero 
zero bc see among others price d ed two zero zero zero europe s first farmers 
cambridge university press harris d ed one nine nine six the origins and spread 
of agriculture in eurasia ucl press a tractor ploughing an alfalfa field the 
reasons for the earliest introduction of farming may have included climate 
change but possibly there were also social reasons e g accumulation of food 
surplus for competitive gift giving most certainly there was a gradual 
transition from hunter gatherer to agricultural economies after a lengthy 
period when some crops were deliberately planted and other foods were gathered 
from the wild although localised climate change is the favoured explanation for 
the origins of agriculture in the levant the fact that farming was invented at 
least three times possibly more suggests that social reasons may have been 
instrumental in addition to emergence of farming in the fertile crescent 
agriculture appeared by at least six eight zero zero bc in east asia rice and 
later in central and south america maize squash small scale agriculture also 
likely arose independently in early neolithic contexts in india rice and 
southeast asia taro sumerian harvester s sickle three zero zero zero bce baked 
clay field museum full dependency on domestic crops and animals i e when wild 
resources contributed a nutritionally insignificant component to the diet was 
not until the bronze age if the operative definition of agriculture includes 
large scale intensive cultivation of land mono cropping organised irrigation 
and use of a specialized labour force the title inventors of agriculture would 
fall to the sumerians starting ca five five zero zero bc intensive farming 
allows a much greater density of population than can be supported by hunting 
and gathering and allows for the accumulation of excess product to keep for 
winter use or to sell for profit the ability of farmers to feed large numbers 
of people whose activities have nothing to do with material production was the 
crucial factor in the rise of standing armies the agriculturalism of the 
sumerians allowed them to embark on an unprecedented territorial expansion 
making them the first empire builders not long after the egyptians powered by 
effective farming of the nile valley achieved a population density from which 
enough warriors could be drawn for a territorial expansion more than tripling 
the sumerian empire in area the invention of a three field system of crop 
rotation during the middle ages vastly improved agricultural efficiency after 
one four nine two the world s agricultural patterns were shuffled in the 
widespread exchange of plants and animals known as the columbian exchange crops 
and animals that were previously only known in the old world were now 
transplanted to the new and vice versa perhaps most notably the tomato became a 
favorite in european cuisine while certain wheat strains quickly took to 
western hemisphere soils and became a dietary staple even for native north 
central and south americans by the early one eight zero zero s agricultural 
practices particularly careful selection of hardy strains and cultivars had so 
improved that yield per land unit was many times that seen in the middle ages 
and before especially in the largely virgin lands of north and south america 
with the rapid rise of mechanization in the two zero th century especially in 
the form of the tractor the demanding tasks of sowing harvesting and threshing 
could be performed with a speed and on a scale barely imaginable before these 
advances have led to efficiencies enabling certain modern farms in the united 
states argentina israel germany and a few other nations to output volumes of 
high quality produce per land unit at what may be the practical limit crops 
world production of major crops in two zero zero four in millions of metric 
tons based on fao estimates by crop types cereals two two six four vegetables 
and melons eight six six roots and tubers seven one five milk six one nine 
fruit five zero three meat two five nine oilcrops one three three fish one 
three zero two zero zero one estimate eggs six three pulses six zero vegetable 
fiber three zero by individual crops sugar cane one three two four maize seven 
two one wheat six two seven rice six zero five potatoes three two eight sugar 
beet two four nine soybean two zero four oil palm fruit one six two barley one 
five four tomato one two zero crop improvement an agricultural scientist 
records corn growth netting protecting wine grapes from birds see main article 
on plant breeding domestication of plants is done in order to increase yield 
improve disease resistance and drought tolerance ease harvest and to improve 
the taste and nutritional value and many other characteristics centuries of 
careful selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics 
of crop plants plant breeders use greenhouses and other techniques to get as 
many as three generations of plants per year so that they can make improvements 
all the more quickly plant selection and breeding in the one nine two zero s 
and three zero s improved pasture grasses and clover in new zealand extensive 
radiation mutagenesis efforts i e primitive genetic engineering during the one 
nine five zero s produced the modern commercial varieties of grains such as 
wheat corn and barley for example average yields of corn maize in the usa have 
increased from around two five tons per hectare four zero bushels per acre in 
one nine zero zero to about nine four t ha one five zero bushels per acre in 
two zero zero one primarily due to improvements in genetics similarly worldwide 
average wheat yields have increased from less than one t ha in one nine zero 
zero to more than two five t ha in one nine nine zero south american average 
wheat yields are around two t ha african under one t ha egypt and arabia up to 
three five to four t ha with irrigation in contrast the average wheat yield in 
countries such as france is over eight t ha higher yields are due to 
improvements in genetics as well as use of intensive farming techniques use of 
fertilizers chemical pest control growth control to avoid lodging conversion 
note one bushel of wheat six zero pounds lb two seven two one five kg one 
bushel of corn five six pounds two five four zero one kg in industrialized 
agriculture crop improvement has often reduced nutritional and other qualities 
of food plants to serve the interests of producers after mechanical tomato 
harvesters were developed in the early one nine six zero s agricultural 
scientists bred tomatoes that were harder and less nutritious friedland and 
barton one nine seven five in fact a major longitudinal study of nutrient 
levels in numerous vegetables showed significant declines in the last five zero 
years garden vegetables in the u s today contain on average three eight percent 
less vitamin b two and one five percent less vitamin c davis and riordan two 
zero zero four very recently genetic engineering has begun to be employed in 
some parts of the world to speed up the selection and breeding process the most 
widely used modification is a herbicide resistance gene that allows plants to 
tolerate exposure to glyphosate which is used to control weeds in the crop a 
less frequently used but more controversial modification causes the plant to 
produce a toxin to reduce damage from insects c f starlink there are specialty 
producers who raise less common types of livestock or plants aquaculture the 
farming of fish shrimp and algae is closely associated with agriculture 
apiculture the culture of bees traditionally for honey increasingly for crop 
pollination see also botany list of domesticated plants list of vegetables list 
of herbs list of fruit environmental problems agriculture may often cause 
environmental problems because it changes natural environments and produces 
harmful by products some of the negative effects are nitrogen and phosphorus 
surplus in rivers and lakes detrimental effects of herbicides fungicides 
insecticides and other biocides conversion of natural ecosystems of all types 
into arable land consolidation of diverse biomass into a few species erosion 
depletion of minerals in the soil particulate matter including ammonia and 
ammonium off gasing from animal waste contributing to air pollution weeds feral 
plants and animals odor from agricultural waste soil salination policy 
agricultural policy focuses on the goals and methods of agricultural production 
at the policy level common goals of agriculture include food safety ensuring 
that the food supply is free of contamination food security ensuring that the 
food supply meets the population s needs food quality ensuring that the food 
supply is of a consistent and known quality conservation environmental impact 
economic stability agricultural revolutions british agricultural revolution 
green revolution neolithic revolution methods there are various methods of 
agricultural production aeroponics aerial topdressing agricultural machinery 
animal husbandry aquaculture beekeeping crop rotation concentrated animal 
feeding operation cafo factory farming composting dairy farming detasseling 
domestication fencing fertilizers greenhouse harvest heliciculture hybrid seed 
hydroponics integrated pest management ipm irrigation livestock market 
gardening monoculture no till farming organic farming plant breeding 
permaculture pollination management precision farming ranching season extension 
seed saving seed testing shepherding subsistence farming succession planting 
sustainable agriculture terracing vegetable farming tillage weed control 
references wells spencer the journey of man a genetic odyssey princeton 
university press two zero zero three isbn zero six nine one one one five three 
two x crosby alfred w the columbian exchange biological and cultural 
consequences of one four nine two praeger publishers two zero zero three three 
zero th anniversary edition isbn zero two seven five nine eight zero seven 
three one collinson m editor a history of farming systems research cabi 
publishing two zero zero zero isbn zero eight five one nine nine four zero five 
nine davis donald r and hugh d riordan two zero zero four changes in usda food 
composition data for four three garden crops one nine five zero to one nine 
nine nine journal of the american college of nutrition vol two three no six six 
six nine six eight two friedland william h and amy barton one nine seven five 
destalking the wily tomato a case study of social consequences in california 
agricultural research univ california at sta cruz research monograph one five 
see also agricultural and food research council uk agricultural education 
agricultural science agricultural sciences basic topics arid zone agriculture 
barnyard community supported agriculture international agricultural research 
family farm hog pen farm equipment land allocation decision support system list 
of domesticated animals list of subsistence techniques list of countries by 
agricultural output list of sustainable agriculture topics permaculture protein 
per unit area timeline of agriculture and food technology usa agriculture herd 
of herefords in a green field external links www fao org food and agriculture 
organization of the united nations world agricultural information centre www 
fao org the un statistical databases www fao org faostat the faostat 
statistical databases www fao org es ess the fao statistics division fao 
agriculture department and its state of food and agriculture two zero zero 
three two zero zero four with a focus on the impact of biotechnology gm crops 
in agriculture a summary for non specialists of the above fao report by 
greenfacts agriculture demon engine of civilization by john zerzan have a 
farmaze for food from afar history of uk agriculture specific countries www agr 
gc ca agriculture agri food canada www nationalpak com agriculture of pakistan 
www nationalacademies org agriculture at the united states national academies 
www usda gov united states department of agriculture current world production 
market and trade reports from the foreign agricultural service usda s main 
source of economic information and research from the economic research service 
in house research arm from the agricultural research service national 
agricultural library agriculture aldous leonard huxley july two six one eight 
nine four november two two one nine six three was a british writer who 
emigrated to the united states he was a member of the famous huxley family who 
produced a number of brilliant scientific minds best known for his novels and 
wide ranging output of essays he also published short stories poetry travel 
writing and film stories and scripts through his novels and essays huxley 
functioned as an examiner and sometimes critic of social mores societal norms 
and ideals and possible misapplications of science in human life while his 
earlier concerns might be called humanist ultimately he became quite interested 
in spiritual subjects like parapsychology and mystically based philosophy which 
he also wrote about by the end of his life huxley was considered in certain 
circles a leader of modern thought biography early years family tree huxley was 
born in godalming surrey england he was the son of the writer leonard huxley by 
his first wife julia arnold and grandson of thomas henry huxley one of the most 
important naturalists of the one nine th century a man known as darwin s 
bulldog his brother julian huxley was a biologist also noted for his 
evolutionary theories huxley understandably excelled in the areas he took up 
professionally for on his father s side were a number of noted men of science 
while on his mother s were people of literary accomplishment huxley was a lanky 
delicately framed child who was gifted intellectually his father was a 
professional herbalist as well as an author so aldous began his learning in his 
father s well equipped botanical laboratory then continued in a school named 
hillside which his mother supervised for several years until she became 
terminally ill from the age of nine aldous was then educated in the british 
boarding school system he took readily to the handling of ideas his mother 
julia died in one nine zero eight when aldous was only fourteen and his sister 
roberta died of an unrelated incident in the same month three years later 
aldous suffered an illness keratitis punctata which seriously damaged his 
eyesight his older brother trev committed suicide in one nine one four aldous s 
near blindness disqualified him from service in world war i once his eyesight 
recovered he was able to read english literature at balliol college oxford 
where he was a member of the cambridge apostles maturing as a lean young man 
well over six feet in height the cerebrotonic huxley s initial interest in 
literature was primarily intellectual while he was noted for his personal 
kindliness only considerably later some say under the influence of such friends 
as d h lawrence did he heartily embrace feelings as matters of importance in 
his evolving personal philosophy and literary expression following his 
education at balliol huxley was financially indebted to his father and had to 
earn a living for a short while in one nine one eight he was employed acquiring 
provisions at the air ministry but never desiring a career in administration or 
in business huxley s lack of inherited means propelled him into applied 
literary work huxley had completed his first unpublished novel at the age of 
seventeen and began writing seriously in his early twenties he wrote great 
novels on dehumanising aspects of scientific progress most famously brave new 
world and on pacifist themes e g eyeless in gaza huxley was strongly influenced 
by f matthias alexander and included him as a character in eyeless in gaza 
middle years already a noted satirist and social thinker during world war i 
huxley spent much of his time at garsington manor home of lady ottoline morrell 
later in crome yellow one nine two one he caricatured the garsington lifestyle 
he married maria nys whom he had met at garsington they had one child matthew 
who grew up to be an epidemiologist huxley moved to hollywood california in one 
nine three seven with his wife and friend gerald heard heard introduced huxley 
to vedanta and meditating in huxley s one nine three seven book ends and means 
most people in modern civilization agree that they want a world of liberty 
peace justice and brotherly love though they haven t been able to agree on how 
to achieve it his book goes on to explore why the confusion or disagreement is 
there and what might be done about it in one nine three eight huxley befriended 
j krishnamurti whose teachings he greatly admired he also became a vedantist in 
the circle of swami prabhavananda and he also introduced christopher isherwood 
to this circle not long after huxley wrote his book on widely held spiritual 
values and ideas the perennial philosophy which discussed teachings of the 
world s great mystics for most of his life since the illness in his teens which 
left huxley nearly blind his eyesight was poor despite the partial recovery 
which had enabled him to study at oxford around one nine three nine he heard of 
the bates method for natural vision improvement and of a teacher margaret 
corbett who was able to teach him in the method he claimed his sight improved 
dramatically as a result of using the method then later wrote a book about it 
the art of seeing which was published in one nine four two us one nine four 
three uk he reported that for the first time in over two five years he was able 
to read without spectacles and without strain he was a screenwriter for the one 
nine four zero production of pride and prejudice later years after world war ii 
huxley applied for united states citizenship but was denied because he would 
not say he would take up arms to defend america he became a vegetarian 
thereafter his works were strongly influenced by mysticism and his experiences 
with the hallucinogenic drug mescaline to which he was introduced by the 
psychiatrist humphry osmond in one nine five three his years on psychoactive 
drugs were described as a paradise washed down with bourbon generally he was a 
pioneer of self directed psychedelic drug use in a search for enlightenment 
famously taking one zero zero micrograms of lsd as he lay dying huxley s 
psychedelic drug experiences are described in the essays the doors of 
perception the title deriving from some lines in the book the marriage of 
heaven and hell by william blake and heaven and hell the title of the former 
became the inspiration for the naming of the rock band the doors some of his 
writings on psychedelics became frequent reading among early hippies huxley s 
main interest was not in just anything vague mysterious or subjective but in 
what is sometimes termed higher mysticism he liked the term perennial 
philosophy that he used as the title of his noted book on the topic during the 
one nine five zero s huxley s interest in the related field of psychical 
research grew keener huxley s wife maria died of breast cancer in one nine five 
five and in one nine five six he remarried to laura archera who was herself an 
author and who wrote a biography of aldous in one nine six zero huxley was 
diagnosed with throat cancer in the years that followed with his health 
deteriorating he wrote the utopian novel island and gave lectures on human 
potentialities at the esalen institute in one nine five nine huxley who 
remained a british citizen turned down an offer of a knight bachelor by the 
macmillan government his ideas were foundational to the forming of the human 
potential movement he was also invited to speak at several prestigious american 
universities at a speech given in one nine six one at the california medical 
school in san francisco huxley warned there will be in the next generation or 
so a pharmacological method of making people love their servitude and producing 
dictatorship without tears so to speak producing a kind of painless 
concentration camp for entire societies so that people will in fact have their 
liberties taken away from them but will rather enjoy it an idea not dissimilar 
to his contemporary writer j b priestley s idea in the magicians huxley s views 
on the proper roles of science and technology as he portrayed these say in 
island are akin to some other noted english and american thinkers of the 
twentieth century such as lewis mumford and huxley s friend gerald heard and in 
some ways buckminster fuller and e f schumacher clearly these men found 
descendants in some significant movers of a younger generation e g stewart 
brand via gerald heard huxley was introduced to the young huston smith who went 
on to become a prolific and famous scholar on the religions of man the two 
friends acquianted smith with vedanta and meditative practice later while 
huxley was a guest professor at m i t he made introductions between smith and 
timothy leary that lead to epiphanies smith covers in his later book cleansing 
of the doors of perception amongst humanists huxley was considered an 
intellectual s intellectual although his financial circumstances had forced him 
to churn out articles and books his thinking and best writing earned him an 
exalted esteem his books were frequently on the required reading lists of 
english and modern philosophy courses in american colleges and universities he 
was one of the twentieth century thinkers honoured in the scribners publishing 
s leaders of modern thought series a volume of biography and literary criticism 
by philip thody aldous huxley death and afterwards on his deathbed unable to 
speak he made a written request to his wife for lsd one zero zero g i m she 
obliged and he died peacefully the following morning november two two one nine 
six three media coverage of his death was overshadowed by news of the 
assassination of president john f kennedy which occurred on the same day as did 
the death of the irish author c s lewis in all of huxley s mature writings one 
finds an awareness that seems to bridge the gap between the two cultures the 
sciences and the humanities this gulf posed a potentially enormous problem one 
that was recognized by other thinkers during huxley s lifetime such as c p snow 
the interest among professors of humanities and liberal arts in huxley s work 
both during the writer s lifetime and afterwards rests on this consciousness on 
the part of the author and of course on the artful and often humorous way in 
which he expressed himself huxley s satirical dystopian and utopian novels 
seldom fail to stimulate thought the same may be said for his essays and essay 
collections perhaps his main message is the tragedy that frequently follows 
from egocentrism self centredness and selfishness films huxley wrote many 
screenplays and many of his novels were later adapted for film or television 
notable works include the original screenplay for disney s animated alice in 
wonderland two productions of brave new world one of point counter point one of 
eyeless in gaza and one of ape and essence he was one of the screenwriters for 
the one nine four zero version of pride and prejudice and co wrote the 
screenplay for the one nine four four version of jane eyre with john houseman 
director ken russell s one nine seven one film the devils starring vanessa 
redgrave is adapted from huxley s the devils of loudun and a one nine nine zero 
made for television film adaptation of brave new world was directed by burt 
brinckeroffer selected works novels crome yellow one nine two one antic hay one 
nine two three those barren leaves one nine two five point counter point one 
nine two eight brave new world one nine three two eyeless in gaza one nine 
three six after many a summer one nine three nine time must have a stop one 
nine four four ape and essence one nine four eight the genius and the goddess 
one nine five five island one nine six two short stories limbo one nine two 
zero mortal coils one nine two two brief candles one nine three zero two or 
three graces little mexican the young arquimedes jacob s hands a fable late one 
nine three zero s poetry the burning wheel one nine one six jonah one nine one 
seven the defeat of youth one nine one eight leda one nine two zero arabia 
infelix one nine two nine the cicadias and other poems one nine three one 
travel writing along the road one nine two five jesting pilate one nine two six 
beyond the mexique bay one nine three four essays do what you will one nine two 
nine the olive tree one nine three six the art of seeing one nine four two 
tomorrow and tomorrow and tomorrow one nine five two the doors of perception 
one nine five four heaven and hell one nine five six brave new world revisited 
one nine five eight literature and science one nine six three philosophy ends 
and means one nine three seven the perennial philosophy one nine four four isbn 
zero zero six zero five seven zero five eight x biography grey eminence one 
nine four one the devils of loudun one nine five two children s literature the 
crows of pearblossom one nine six seven collections text and pretext one nine 
three three collected short stories one nine five seven moksha writings on 
psychedelics and the visionary experience one nine seven seven quotes on truth 
great is truth but still greater from a practical point of view is silence 
about truth by simply not mentioning certain subjects totalitarian 
propagandists have influenced opinion much more effectively than they could 
have by the most eloquent denunciations on the new world order one nine five 
nine and it seems to me perfectly in the cards that there will be within the 
next generation or so a pharmacological method of making people love their 
servitude and producing a kind of painless concentration camp for entire 
societies so that people will in fact have their liberties taken away from them 
but will rather enjoy it because they will be distracted from any desire to 
rebel by propaganda brainwashing or brainwashing enhanced by pharmacological 
methods on social organizations one of the many reasons for the bewildering and 
tragic character of human existence is the fact that social organization is at 
once necessary and fatal men are forever creating such organizations for their 
own convenience and forever finding themselves the victims of their home made 
monsters trivia he was six feet four and a half inches tall studied ballet for 
several years was george orwell s french teacher for a term at eton is shown on 
the cover of the beatles album sgt pepper s lonely hearts club band as number 
one eight in the top right hand corner external links video interviews of 
huxley from the one nine five zero s exploring brave new world island and 
psychedelics the gravity of light brave new world the complete book somaweb 
extensive aldous huxley bibliography and links to online material island web 
creating a new culture as inspired by the ideas of aldous huxley website of the 
island foundation the ultimate revolution talk at uc berkeley march two zero 
one nine six two polymaths natives of surrey huxley family former students of 
balliol college oxford english novelists british science fiction writers 
english science fiction writers english poets english essayists english 
satirists english short story writers english travel writers psychedelic 
advocates and proponents human potential movement vegetarians meanings of ada 
people variant transliteration of hebrew adah ada lady lovelace ada sister of 
charlemagne for whom the ada gospels at trier were produced ada satrap of caria 
deposed by her brother idrieus restored by alexander the great places ada 
afghanistan ada saskatchewan canada ada ghana ada greece ada nigeria ada serbia 
ada oregon usa historical ada county idaho usa ada division oklahoma usa ada 
alabama usa ada arkansas usa ada kansas usa ada louisiana usa ada michigan usa 
ada minnesota usa ada ohio usa ada oklahoma usa ada virginia usa ada wisconsin 
usa ada west virginia usa ada township michigan usa ada township north dakota 
usa ada township south dakota usa initialisms aeronautical development agency 
of india s ministry of defence air defense artillery a branch of the united 
states army american decency association american dental association american 
diabetes association american dietetic association americans for democratic 
action americans with disabilities act aotearoa digital arts http ada waikato 
ac nz assistant district attorney average daily attendance other ada 
programming language ada a genus of orchids the short title of ada or ardor a 
family chronicle a novel by vladimir nabokov one nine six nine ada a demon 
after which adasaurus was named ada a film directed by daniel mann with susan 
hayward y dean martin means father in sindarin elvish aberdeen may refer to 
places in scotland aberdeen a major port city in north east scotland in 
australia aberdeen new south wales in canada aberdeen centre an asian themed 
shopping mall in richmond british columbia aberdeen british columbia two 
locations aberdeen fraser valley regional district british columbia aberdeen 
thompson nicola regional district british columbia aberdeen new brunswick 
aberdeen nova scotia new aberdeen nova scotia aberdeen bay nunavut aberdeen 
lake nunavut aberdeen ontario two locations aberdeen ontario grey county 
aberdeen ontario prescott and russell county aberdeen township ontario 
macdonald merideth and aberdeen additional ontario sheen esher aberdeen et 
malakoff quebec aberdeen saskatchewan aberdeen no three seven three 
saskatchewan in china aberdeen harbour hong kong in south africa aberdeen south 
africa in the united states aberdeen arkansas aberdeen california aberdeen 
florida aberdeen georgia aberdeen idaho aberdeen indiana aberdeen kentucky 
aberdeen massachusetts aberdeen maryland aberdeen mississippi aberdeen montana 
aberdeen township new jersey aberdeen north carolina aberdeen ohio aberdeen 
pennsylvania aberdeen south dakota aberdeen texas aberdeen washington aberdeen 
west virginia other aberdeen band an american rock band aberdeen movie a movie 
two zero zero zero directed by hans petter moland starring stellan skarsg rd 
and lena headey aberdeen city band aberdeen proving ground a u s army 
installation in maryland this article is about an organism see algae 
programming language for a programming language in computing a seaweed 
laurencia up close the branches are multicellular and only about one mm thick 
much smaller algae are seen growing attached to the structure extending upwards 
in the lower right quarter algae singular alga encompass several different 
groups of living organisms that capture light energy through photosynthesis 
converting inorganic substances into simple sugars using the captured energy 
algae have been traditionally regarded as simple plants and some are closely 
related to the higher plants others appear to represent different protist 
groups alongside other organisms that are traditionally considered more animal 
like that is protozoa thus algae do not represent a single evolutionary 
direction or line but a level of organization that may have developed several 
times in the early history of life on earth algae range from single celled 
organisms to multi cellular organisms some with fairly complex differentiated 
form and if marine called seaweeds all lack leaves roots flowers and other 
organ structures that characterize higher plants they are distinguished from 
other protozoa in that they are photoautotrophic although this is not a hard 
and fast distinction as some groups contain members that are mixotrophic 
deriving energy both from photosynthesis and uptake of organic carbon either by 
osmotrophy myzotrophy or phagotrophy some unicellular species rely entirely on 
external energy sources and have reduced or lost their photosynthetic apparatus 
all algae have photosynthetic machinery ultimately derived from the 
cyanobacteria and so produce oxygen as a by product of photosynthesis unlike 
non cyanobacterial photosynthetic bacteria algae are usually found in damp 
places or bodies of water and thus are common in terrestrial as well as aquatic 
environments however terrestrial algae are usually rather inconspicuous and far 
more common in moist tropical regions than dry ones because algae lack vascular 
tissues and other adaptions to live on land algae can endure dryness and other 
conditions in symbiosis with a fungus as lichen the various sorts of algae play 
significant roles in aquatic ecology microscopic forms that live suspended in 
the water column called phytoplankton provide the food base for most marine 
food chains in very high densities so called algal blooms these algae may 
discolor the water and outcompete or poison other life forms seaweeds grow 
mostly in shallow marine waters some are used as human food or harvested for 
useful substances such as agar or fertilizer the study of algae is called 
phycology or algology relationships among algal groups prokaryotic algae 
traditionally the cyanobacteria have been included among the algae referred to 
as the cyanophytes or blue green algae the term algae refers to any aquatic 
organisms capable of photosynthesis though some recent treatises on algae 
specifically exclude them cyanobacteria are some of the oldest organisms to 
appear in the fossil record dating back about three eight billion years 
precambrian ancient cyanobacteria likely produced much of the oxygen in the 
earth s atmosphere cyanobacteria can be unicellular colonial or filamentous 
they have a prokaryotic cell structure typical of bacteria and conduct 
photosynthesis directly within the cytoplasm rather than in specialized 
organelles some filamentous blue green algae have specialized cells termed 
heterocysts in which nitrogen fixation occurs eukaryotic algae all other algae 
are eukaryotes and conduct photosynthesis within membrane bound structures 
organelles called chloroplasts chloroplasts contain dna and are similar in 
structure to cyanobacteria presumably representing reduced cyanobacterial 
endosymbionts the exact nature of the chloroplasts is different among the 
different lines of algae reflecting different endosymbiotic events there are 
three groups archaeplastida that have primary chloroplasts green algae together 
with higher plants red algae glaucophytes in these groups the chloroplast is 
surrounded by two membranes and probably developed through a single 
endosymbiosis the chloroplasts of red algae have a more or less typical 
cyanobacterial pigmentation while those of the green alga have chloroplasts 
with chlorophyll a and b the latter found in some cyanobacteria and not most 
higher plants are pigmented similarly to green algae and probably developed 
from them two other groups of algae have green chloroplasts containing 
chlorophyll b euglenids and chlorarachniophytes these are surrounded by three 
and four membranes respectively and were probably retained from an ingested 
green alga those of the chlorarchniophytes contain a small nucleomorph which is 
the remnant of the alga s nucleus it has been suggested that the euglenid 
chloroplasts only have three membranes because they were acquired through 
myzocytosis rather than phagocytosis the remaining algae all have chloroplasts 
containing chlorophylls a and c the latter chlorophyll type is not known from 
any prokaryotes or primary chloroplasts but genetic similarities with the red 
algae suggest a relationship there these groups include heterokonts e g golden 
algae diatoms brown algae haptophytes e g coccolithophores cryptomonads 
dinoflagellates in the first three of these groups chromista the chloroplast 
has four membranes retaining a nucleomorph in cryptomonads and they likely 
share a common pigmented ancestor the typical dinoflagellate chloroplast has 
three membranes but there is considerable diversity in chloroplasts among the 
group as some members have acquired theirs from different sources the 
apicomplexa a group of closely related parasites also have plastids though not 
actual chloroplasts which appear to have a common origin with those of the 
dinoflagellates note many of these groups contain some members that are no 
longer photosynthetic some retain plastids but not chloroplasts while others 
have lost them entirely forms of algae most of the simpler algae are 
unicellular flagellates or amoeboids but colonial and non motile forms have 
developed independently among several of the groups some of the more common 
organizational levels more than one of which may occur in the life cycle of a 
species are colonial small regular groups of motile cells capsoid individual 
non motile cells embedded in mucilage coccoid individual non motile cells with 
cell walls palmelloid non motile cells embedded in mucilage filamentous a 
string of non motile cells connected together sometimes branching 
parenchymatous cells forming a thallus with partial differentiation of tissues 
in three lines even higher levels of organization have been reached leading to 
organisms with full tissue differentiation these are the brown algae some of 
which may reach seven zero m in length kelps the red algae and the green algae 
the most complex forms are found among the green algae see charales in a 
lineage that eventually led to the higher land plants the point where these non 
algal plants begin and algae stop is usually taken to be the presence of 
reproductive organs with protective cell layers a characteristic not found in 
the other alga groups algae and symbioses some species of algae form symbiotic 
relationships with other organisms in these symbioses the algae supply 
photosynthates organic substances to the host organism providing protection to 
the algal cells the host organism derives some or all of its energy 
requirements from the alga examples include lichens a fungus is the host 
usually with a green alga or a cyanobacterium as its symbiont both fungal and 
algal species found in lichens are capable of living independently although 
habitat requirements may be greatly different from those of the lichen pair 
corals algae known as zooxanthellae are symbionts with corals notable amongst 
these is the dinoflagellate symbiodinium found in many hard corals the loss of 
symbiodinium or other zooxanthellae from the host is known as coral bleaching 
sponges uses of algae algae are used by man in a great many ways because many 
species are aquatic and microscopic they are cultured in clear tanks or ponds 
and either harvested or used to treat effluents pumped through the ponds algae 
culture on a large scale is an important type of aquaculture in some places 
energy source algae can be used to produce biodiesel see algae culture and by 
some estimates can produce vastly superior amounts of oil compared to 
terrestrial crops grown for the same purpose because algae grown to produce 
biodiesel does not need to meet the requirements of a food crop it is much 
cheaper to produce also it does not need fresh water or fertilizer both of 
which are quite expensive algae can be grown to produce hydrogen in one nine 
three nine a german researcher named hans gaffron while working at the 
university of chicago observed that the algae he was studying chlamydomonas 
reinhardtii a green algae would sometimes switch from the production of oxygen 
to the production of hydrogen gaffron never discovered the cause for this 
change and for many years other scientists failed in their attempts at its 
discovery in the late one nine nine zero s professor anastasios melis a 
researcher at the university of california at berkeley discovered that if you 
deprive the algae of sulfur it will switch from the production of oxygen normal 
photosynthesis to the production of hydrogen he found that the enzyme 
responsible for this reaction is hydrogenase but that the hydrogenase will not 
cause this switch in the pressence of oxygen melis found that depleting the 
amount of sulfur available to the algae interrupted its internal oxygen flow 
allowing the hydrogenase an environment in which it can react causing the algae 
to produce hydrogen chlamydomonas moeweesi is also a good strain for the 
production of hydrogen algae can be grown to produce biomass which can be 
burned to produce heat and electricity pmb berkeley edu pollution control algae 
are used in wastewater treatment facilities reducing the need for more 
dangerous chemicals algae can be used to capture fertilizers in runoff from 
farms if this algae is then harvested it itself can be used as fertilizer algae 
are used by some powerplants to reduce co two emissions the co two is pumped 
into a pond or some kind of tank on which the algae feed nutritional value of 
algae algae is commercially cultivated as a nutritional supplement one of the 
most popular microalgal species is spirulina arthrospira platensis which is a 
cyanobacteria known as blue green algae and has been hailed by some as a 
superfood other algal species cultivated for their nutritional value include 
chlorella a green algae and dunaliella dunaliella salina which is high in beta 
carotene and is used in vitamin c supplements algae is sometimes also used as a 
food as in the chinese vegetable known as fat choy which is actually a 
cyanobacterium the oil from some algae have high levels of unsaturated fatty 
acids arachidonic acid a polyunsaturated fatty acid is very high in 
parietochloris incisa a green algae where it reaches up to four seven of the 
triglyceride pool bigogno c et al phytochemistry two zero zero two six zero 
four nine seven www spirulinasource com www cfsan fda gov fda on algal oil use 
in food products the natural pigments produced by algae can be used as an 
alternative to chemical dyes and coloring agents many of the paper products 
used today are not recyclable because of the chemical inks that they use paper 
recyclers have found that inks made from algae are much easier to break down 
there is also much interest in the food industry into replacing the coloring 
agents that are currently used with coloring derived from algal pigments see 
also algae culture brown algae coccolithophore cyanobacteria diatom golden 
algae green algae important publications in phycology red algae yellow green 
algae external links www phyco org a wiki based site that is focused on energy 
production from algae biodieselnow com biodiesel production biodiesel from 
algae www algaebase org australian freshwater algae sydney botanic gardens 
learn about algae red tide national office for marine biotoxins and harmful 
algal blooms usa algae section national museum of natural history smithsonian 
institution www plantphysiol org cyanosite algae botany in statistics analysis 
of variance anova is a collection of statistical models and their associated 
procedures which compare means by splitting the overall observed variance into 
different parts the initial techniques of the analysis of variance were 
pioneered by the statistician and geneticist ronald fisher in the one nine two 
zero s and one nine three zero s and is sometimes known as fisher s anova or 
fisher s analysis of variance overview there are three conceptual classes of 
such models fixed effects model assumes that the data come from normal 
populations which differ in their means random effects models assume that the 
data describe a hierarchy of different populations whose differences are 
constrained by the hierarchy mixed models describe situations where both fixed 
and random effects are present the fundamental technique is a partitioning of 
the total sum of squares into components related to the effects in the model 
used for example we show the model for a simplified anova with one type of 
treatment at different levels if the treatment levels are quantitative and the 
effects are linear a linear regression analysis may be appropriate ss ss ss the 
number of degrees of freedom abbreviated df can be partitioned in a similar way 
and specifies the chi square distribution which describes the associated sums 
of squares df df df fixed effects model the fixed effects model of analysis of 
variance applies to situations in which the experimenter has subjected his 
experimental material to several treatments each of which affects only the mean 
of the underlying normal distribution of the response variable random effects 
model random effects models are used to describe situations in which 
incomparable differences in experimental material occur the simplest example is 
that of estimating the unknown mean of a population whose individuals differ 
from each other in this case the variation between individuals is confounded 
with that of the observing instrument degrees of freedom degrees of freedom 
indicates the effective number of observations which contribute to the sum of 
squares in an anova the total number of observations minus the number of linear 
constraints in the data tests of significance analyses of variance lead to 
tests of statistical significance using fisher s f distribution see also ancova 
manova important publications in analysis of variance multiple comparisons 
duncan s new multiple range test external links analysis of variance 
sixsigmafirst statistics for saturated hydrocarbons containing one or more 
rings see cycloalkane an alkane in organic chemistry is a saturated hydrocarbon 
without cycles that is an acyclic hydrocarbon in which the molecule has the 
maximum possible number of hydrogen atoms and so has no double bonds alkanes 
are aliphatic compounds the general formula for alkanes is cnh two n two the 
simplest possible alkane is therefore methane ch four the next simplest is 
ethane c two h six the series continues indefinitely each carbon atom in an 
alkane has sp hybridization alkanes are also known as paraffins or collectively 
as the paraffin series these terms also used for alkanes whose carbon atoms 
form a single unbranched chain such branched chain alkanes are called 
isoparaffins isomerism the atoms in alkanes with more than three carbon atoms 
can be arranged in multiple ways forming different isomers normal alkanes have 
a linear unbranched configuration the number of isomers increases rapidly with 
the number of carbon atoms for alkanes with one to one two carbon atoms the 
number of isomers equals one one one two three five nine one eight three five 
seven five one five nine and three five five respectively nomenclature of 
alkanes the names of all alkanes end with ane alkanes with unbranched carbon 
chains the first four members of the series in terms of number of carbon atoms 
are named as follows methane ch four ethane c two h six propane c three h eight 
butane c four h one zero alkanes with five or more carbon atoms are named by 
adding the suffix ane to the appropriate numerical multiplier with elision of a 
terminal a from the basic numerical term hence pentane c five h one two hexane 
c six h one four heptane c seven h one six octane c eight h one eight etc for a 
more complete list see list of alkanes straight chain alkanes are sometimes 
indicated by the prefix n for normal to distinguish them from branched chain 
alkanes having the same number of carbon atoms although this is not strictly 
necessary the usage is still common in cases where there is an important 
difference in properties between the straight chain and branched chain isomers 
e g n hexane is a neurotoxin while its branched chain isomers are not alkanes 
with branched carbon chains branched alkanes are named as follows identify the 
longest straight chain of carbon atoms number the atoms in this chain starting 
from one at one end and counting upwards to the other end examine the groups 
attached to the chain in order and form their names form the name by looking at 
the different attached groups and writing for each group the following the 
number or numbers of the carbon atom or atoms where it is attached the prefixes 
di tri tetra etc if the group is attached in two three four etc places or 
nothing if it is attached in only one place the name of the attached group the 
formation of the name is finished by writing down the name of the longest 
straight chain to carry out this algorithm we must know how to name the 
substituent groups this is done by the same method except that instead of the 
longest chain of carbon atoms the longest chain starting from the attachment 
point is used also the numbering is done so that the carbon atom next to the 
attachment point has the number one for example the compound is the only four 
carbon alkane possible apart from butane its formal name is two methylpropane 
pentane however has two branched isomers in addition to its linear normal form 
two two dimethylpropane and two methylbutane trivial names the following 
nonsystematic names are retained in the iupac system isobutane for two 
methylpropane isopentane for two methylbutane neopentane for two two 
dimethylpropane the name isooctane is very widely used in the petrochemical 
industry to refer to two two four trimethylpentane occurrence methane and 
ethane make up a large proportion of jupiter s atmosphere alkanes occur both on 
earth and in the solar system however only the first hundred or so and even 
then mostly only in traces the light hydrocarbons especially methane and ethane 
for example have been detected both in the tail of the comet hyakutake and in 
some meteorites such as carbonaceous chondrites they also form an important 
portion of the atmospheres of the outer gas planets jupiter saturn uranus and 
neptune on titan the satellite of saturn it is believed that there were once 
large oceans of these and longer chain alkanes smaller seas of liquid ethane 
are thought still to exist there traces of methane about zero zero zero zero 
one or one ppm occur in the earth s atmosphere produced primarily by forms of 
archaea the content in the oceans is negligible due to the low solubility in 
water however at high pressures and low temperatures methane can co crystallize 
with water to form a solid methane hydrate although they cannot be commercially 
exploited at the present time the calorific value of the known methane hydrate 
fields exceeds the energy content of all the natural gas and oil deposits put 
together methane extracted from methane hydrate is considered therefore a 
candidate for future fuels extraction of alkanes in ontario today the most 
important commercial sources for alkanes are clearly natural gas and oil which 
are the only organic compounds to occur as minerals in nature natural gas 
contains primarily methane and ethane with some propane and butane oil is a 
mixture of liquid alkanes and other hydrocarbons both were formed when dead 
marine animals and plants zooplankton and phytoplankton sank to the bottom of 
ancient seas and were covered with sediments in an anoxic environment ie 
lacking in oxygen and converted over many millions of years at high 
temperatures and high pressure to their current form natural gas resulted 
thereby for example from the following reaction c six h one two o six three ch 
four three co two these hydrocarbons collected in porous rocks trapped beneath 
an impermeable cap rock in contrast to methane which is constantly reformed in 
large quantities higher alkanes rarely develop to a considerable extent in 
nature the present deposits will not be reformed once they are exhausted solid 
alkanes occur as evaporation residues from oil known as tar one of the largest 
natural deposits of solid alkanes is in the asphalt lake known as the pitch 
lake in trinidad and tobago purification and use an oil refinery at martinez 
california alkanes are both important raw materials of the chemical industry 
and the most important fuels of the world economy the starting materials for 
the processing are always natural gas and crude oil the latter is separated in 
an oil refinery by fractional distillation and processed into many different 
products for example gasoline the different fractions of crude oil have 
different boiling points and can be isolated and separated quite easily within 
the individual fractions the boiling points lie closely together the domain of 
usage of a certain alkane can be determined quite well according to the number 
of carbon atoms although the following demarcation is idealized and not perfect 
the first four alkanes are used mainly for heating and cooking purposes and in 
some countries for electricity generation methane and ethane are the main 
componants of natural gas they are normally stored as gases under pressure it 
is however easier to transport them as liquids this requires both compression 
and cooling of the gas propane and butane can be liquefied at fairly low 
pressures and are well known as liquified petroleum gas lpg propane for example 
is used in the propane gas burner butane in disposable cigarette lighters where 
the pressure is a mere two bar the two alkanes are used as propellants in 
aerosol sprays from pentane to octane the alkanes are highly volatile liquids 
they are used as fuels in internal combustion engines as they vaporise easily 
on entry into the combustion chamber without forming droplets which would 
impair the unifomity of the combustion branched chain alkanes are preferred as 
they are much less prone to premature ignition which causes knocking than their 
straight chain homologues this propensity to premature ignition is measured by 
the octane rating of the fuel where two two four trimethylpentane isooctane has 
an arbitrary value of one zero zero and heptane has a value of zero apart from 
their use as fuels the middle alkanes are also good solvents for nonpolar 
substances alkanes from nonane to for instance hexadecane an alkane with 
sixteen carbon atoms are liquids of higher viscosity less and less suitable for 
use in gasoline they form instead the major part of diesel and aviation fuel 
diesel fuels are charaterised by their cetane number cetane being an old name 
for hexadecane however the higher melting points of these alkanes can cause 
problems at low temperatures and in polar regions where the fuel becomes too 
thick to flow correctly alkanes from hexadecane upwards form the most important 
components of fuel oil and lubricating oil in latter function they work at the 
same time as anti corrosive agents as their hydrophobic nature means that water 
cannot reach the metal surface many solid alkanes find use as paraffin wax for 
example in candles this should not be confused however with true wax which 
consists primarily of esters alkanes with a chain length of approximately three 
five or more carbon atoms are found in bitumen used for example in road 
surfacing however the higher alkanes have little value and are usually split 
into lower alkanes by cracking preparation numerous ways exist to prepare 
alkanes in the laboratory the most well known methods are hydrogenation of 
alkenes and hydrolysis of grignard reagents alkanes can also be prepared 
directly from alkyl halides in the corey house posner whitesides reaction the 
barton mccombie deoxygenation removes hydroxyl groups from alcohols and the 
clemmensen reduction removes carbonyl groups from aldehydes and ketones to form 
alkanes molecular geometry sp three hybridisation in methane the molecular 
structure of the alkanes directly affects their physical and chemical 
characteristics it is derived from the electron configuration of carbon which 
has four valence electrons the carbon atoms in alkanes are always sp three 
hybridised that is to say that the valence electrons are said to be in four 
equivalent orbitals derived from the combination of the two s orbital and the 
three two p orbitals these orbitals which have identical energies are arranged 
spatially in the form of a tetrahedron the angle of one zero nine four seven 
between them bond lengths and bond angles an alkane molecule has only c h and c 
c single bonds the former result from the overlap of a sp orbital of carbon 
with the one s orbital of a hydrogen the latter by the overlap of two sp 
orbitals on different carbon atoms the bond lengths amount to one zero nine one 
zero one zero m for a c h bond and one five four one zero one zero m for a c c 
bond the tetrahedral structure of methane the spatial arrangement of the bonds 
is similar to that of the four sp orbitals they are tetrahedrally arranged with 
an angle of one zero nine four seven between them structural formulae which 
represent the bonds as being at right angles to one another while both common 
and useful do not correspond with the reality conformation the structural 
formula and the bond angles are not usually sufficient to completely describe 
the geometry of a molecule there is a further degree of freedom for each carbon 
carbon bond the torsion angle between the atoms or groups bound to the atoms at 
each end of the bond the spatial arrangement described by the torsion angles of 
the molecule is known as its conformation ethane ethane forms the simplest case 
for studying the conformation of alkanes as there is only one c c bond if one 
looks down the axis of the c c bond then one will see the so called newman 
projection the circle represents the two carbon atoms one behind the other and 
the bonds to hydrogen are represented by the straight lines the hydrogen atoms 
on both the front and rear carbon atoms have an angle of one two zero between 
them resulting from the projection of the base of the tetrahedron onto a flat 
plane however the torsion angle between a given hydrogen atom attached to the 
front carbon and a given hydrogen atom attached to the rear carbon can vary 
freely between zero and three six zero this is a consequence of the free 
rotation about a carbon carbon single bond despite this apparent freedom only 
two limiting conformations are important newman projections of the two 
conformations of ethane eclipsed on the left staggered on the right in the 
eclipsed conformation corresponding to a torsion angle of zero one two zero or 
two four zero the hydrogen atoms attached to the front carbon are directly in 
front of those attached to the rear carbon in the staggered conformation 
corresponding to a torsion angle of six zero one eight zero or three zero zero 
the hydrogen atoms attached to the front carbon are exactly in between those 
attached to the rear carbon the two conformations also known as rotomers differ 
in energy the staggered conformation is one two six kj mol lower in energy more 
stable than the eclipsed conformation the explanation for this difference in 
energy has been the subject of debate with two main theories predominating in 
the eclipsed conformation the electrostatic repulsion between the electrons in 
the carbon hydrogen bonds is maximised in the staggered conformation the 
hyperconjugation a form of delocalisation of the valence electrons is maximised 
these two explanations are not contradictory or exclusive the latter is thought 
to be the more important for ethane itself this difference in energy between 
the two conformations known as the torsion energy is low compared to the 
thermal energy of an ethane molecule at ambient temperature there is constant 
rotation about the c c bond albeit with short pauses at each staggered 
conformation the time taken for an ethane molecule to pass from one staggered 
conformation to the next equivalent to the rotation of one ch three group by 
one two zero relative to the other is of the order of one zero one one seconds 
higher alkanes the four conformations of butane from left to right fully 
eclipsed inclined partially eclipsed antiperiplanar the situation with respect 
to the two c c bonds in propane is qualitatively similar to that of ethane it 
is more complex however for butane and higher alkanes if one takes the central 
c c bond of butane as the reference axis each of the two central carbon atoms 
is bound to two hydrogen atoms and a methyl group four different conformations 
can be defined by the torsion angle between the two methyl groups and as in the 
case of ethane each has its characteristic energy the fully eclipsed or 
synperiplanar conformation has a torsion angle of zero it is the configuration 
with the highest energy the inclined conformation has a torsion angle of six 
zero or three zero zero it is a local energy minimum the partially eclipsed 
conformation has a torsion angle of one two zero or two four zero it is a local 
energy maximum the antiperiplanar conformation has a torsion angle of one eight 
zero the two methyl groups are as far from each other as is possible and this 
configuration has the lowest energy the difference in energy between the fully 
eclipsed conformation and the antiperiplanar conformation is about one nine kj 
mol and is therefore still relatively small at ambient temperature the case of 
higher alkanes is similar the antiperiplanar conformation is always the most 
favoured around each carbon carbon bond for this reason alkanes are usually 
shown in a zigzag arrangement in diagrams or in models the actual structure 
will always differ somewhat from these idealised forms as the differences in 
energy between the conformations are small compared to the thermal energy of 
the molecules alkane molecules have no fixed structural form whatever the 
models may suggest the conformations of other organic molecules are based on 
those of alkanes and are discussed in the relevant articles properties physical 
properties melting blue and boiling pink points of the first one four n alkanes 
in c the molecular structure particularly the surface area of the molecule 
determines the boiling point of the alkane the smaller the surface the lower 
the boiling point as the van der waals forces between the molecules are weaker 
a reduction of the surface area can be achieved by chain branching or by a 
circular structure this means in practice that alkanes with higher number of 
carbon atoms usually have higher boiling points than those with lower numbers 
of carbon atoms and that branched chain alkanes and cycloalkanes have lower 
boiling points than their straight chain homologues under standard conditions 
from ch four to c four h one zero alkanes are gaseous from c five h one two to 
c one seven h three six they are liquids and after c one eight h three eight 
they are solids the boiling point increases between two zero and three zero c 
per ch two group the melting points of the alkanes also rise with the increase 
in the number of carbon atoms with only one exception propane however the 
melting points rise more slowly than the boiling points in particular for the 
higher alkanes in addition the melting points of alkanes with an odd number of 
carbon atoms increase faster than the melting points of alkanes with an even 
number of carbon atoms see figure the cause of this phenomenon is the higher 
packing density of the alkanes with an even number of carbon atoms the melting 
points of branched chain alkanes can be either higher or lower than those of 
the corresponding straight chain alkanes depending on the efficiency of 
molecular packing this is particularly true for isoalkanes two methyl isomers 
which often have melting points higher than those of their normal analogues 
alkanes do not conduct electricity nor are they substantially polarized by an 
electric field for this reason they do not form hydrogen bonds and are 
insoluble in polar solvents such as water since the hydrogen bonds between 
individual water molecules are aligned away from an alkane molecule the 
coexistance of an alkane and water leads to an increase in molecular order a 
reduction in entropy as there is no significant bonding between water molecules 
and alkane molecules the second law of thermodynamics suggests that this 
reduction in entropy should be minimised by minimising the contact between 
alkane and water alkanes are said to be hydrophobic in that they repel water 
their solubility in nonpolar solvents is relatively good a property which is 
called lipophilicity different alkanes are for example miscible in all 
proportions among themselves the density of the alkanes usually increases with 
increasing number of carbon atoms but remains less than that of water hence 
alkanes form the upper layer in an alkane water mixture chemical properties 
alkanes generally show a relatively low reactivity because their c h and c c 
bonds are relatively stable and cannot be easily broken unlike all other 
organic compounds they possess no functional groups they react only very poorly 
with ionic or other polar substances the p k a values of all alkanes are above 
six zero and so they are practically inert to acids and bases this inertness is 
the source of the term paraffins latin para affinis with the meaning here of 
lacking affinity in crude oil the alkane molecules have remained chemically 
unchanged for millions of years however redox reactions of alkanes in 
particular with oxygen and the halogens are possible as the carbon atoms are in 
a strongly reduced condition in the case of methane the lowest possible 
oxidation state for carbon four is reached reaction with oxygen leads to 
combustion with halogens substitution in addition alkanes have been shown to 
interact with and bind to certain transition metal complexes free radicals 
molecules with unpaired electrons play a large role in most reactions of 
alkanes such as cracking and reformation where long chain alkanes are converted 
into shorter chain alkanes and straight chain alkanes into branched chain 
isomers in highly brached alkanes the bond angles may differ significantly from 
the optimal value one zero nine five in order to allow the different groups 
sufficient space this causes a tension in the molecule known as steric 
hinderance and can substantially increase the reactivity thermochemistry 
alkanes are stable molecules relative to their constituent elements which is 
manifested as a negative heat of formation for linear alkanes each methylene ch 
two unit contributes five kcal mol to the overal heat of formation branched 
alkanes are always a little bit more stable than their linear isomers for 
example two methylbutane is more stable than n pentane by one eight kcal mol 
and two two methylpropane is more stable than n pentane by five kcal mol see 
the alkane heat of formation table for detailed data spectroscopic properties 
virtually all organic compounds contain carbon carbon and carbon hydrogen bonds 
and so show some of the features of alkanes in their spectra alkanes are 
notable for having no other groups and therefore for the absence of other 
characreistic spectroscopic features infrared spectroscopy the carbon hydrogen 
stretching mode gives a strong absorption between two eight five zero and two 
nine six zero cm one while the carbon carbon stretching mode absorbes between 
eight zero zero and one three zero zero cm one the carbon hydrogen bending 
modes depend on the nature of the group methyl groups show bands at one four 
five zero cm one and one three seven five cm one while methylene groups show 
bands at one four six five cm one and one four five zero cm one carbon chains 
with more than four carbon atoms show a weak absorption at around seven two 
five cm one nmr spectroscopy the proton resonances of alkanes are usually found 
at h zero one the carbon one three resonances depend on the number of hydrogen 
atoms attached to the carbon c eight three zero methyl one five five five 
methylene two zero six zero methyne the carbon one three resonance of 
quaternary carbon atoms is characteristically weak due to the lack of nuclear 
overhauser enhancement and the long relaxation time it can be missed in routine 
spectra mass spectrometry alkanes have a high ionisation energy and the 
molecular ion is usually weak the fragmentation pattern can be difficult to 
interpret but in the case of branched chain alkanes the carbon chain is 
preferentially cleaved at tertiary or quaternary carbons due to the relative 
stability of the resulting free radicals the fragment resulting from the loss 
of a single methyl group m one five is often absent and other fragment are 
often spaced by intervals of fourteen mass units corresponding to sequential 
loss of ch two groups reactions reactions with oxygen all alkanes react with 
oxygen in a combustion reaction although they become increasing difficult to 
ignite as the number of carbon atoms increases the general equation for 
complete combustion is two c n h two n two three n one o two two n one h two o 
two n co two in the absence of sufficient oxygen carbon monoxide or even soot 
can be formed as shown below for methane two ch four three o two two co four h 
two o ch four o two c two h two o alkanes usually burn with a non luminous 
flame with very little soot formation the standard enthalpy change of 
combustion c h o for alkanes increases by about six five zero kj mol per ch two 
group branched chain alkanes have lower values of c h o than straight chain 
alkanes of the same number of carbon atoms and so can be seen to be somewhat 
more stable reactions with halogens alkanes react with halogens in a so called 
halogenation reaction the hydrogen atoms of the alkane are progressively 
replaced or substituted by halogen atoms free radicals are the reactive species 
which participate in the reaction which usually leads to a mixture of products 
the reaction is highly exothermic and can lead to an explosion the chain 
mechanism is as follows using the chlorination of methane as a typical example 
one initiation splitting of a chlorine molecule to form two chlorine atoms 
initiated by ultraviolet radiation a chlorine atom has an unpaired electron and 
acts as a free radical cl two two cl two propagation two steps a hydrogen atom 
is pulled off from methane then the methyl radical pulls a cl from cl two ch 
four cl ch three hcl ch three cl two ch three cl cl this results in the desired 
product plus another chlorine radical this radical will then go on to take part 
in another propagation reaction causing a chain reaction if there is sufficient 
chlorine other products such as ch two cl two may be formed three termination 
recombination of two free radicals cl cl cl two or ch three cl ch three cl or 
ch three ch three c two h six the last possibility in the termination step will 
result in an impurity in the final mixture notably this results in an organic 
molecule with a longer carbon chain than the reactants in the case of methane 
or ethane all the hydrogen atoms are equivalent and have an equal chance of 
being replaced this leads to what is known as a statistical product 
distribution for propane and higher alkanes the hydrogen atoms which form part 
of ch two or ch groups are preferentially replaced the reactivity of the 
different halogens varies considerably the relative rates are fluorine one zero 
eight chlorine one bromine seven one zero one one iodine two one zero two two 
hence the reaction of alkanes with fluorine is difficult to control that with 
chlorine is moderate to fast that with bromine is slow and requires high levels 
of uv irradiation while the reaction with iodine is practically non existent 
and thermodynamically unfavorable these reactions are an important industrial 
route to halogenated hydrocarbons cracking and reforming cracking breaks larger 
molecules into smaller ones this can be done with a thermic or catalytic method 
the thermal cracking process follows a homolytic mechanism that is bonds break 
symmetrically and thus pairs of free radicals are formed the catalytic cracking 
process involves the presence of acid catalysts usually solid acids such as 
silica alumina and zeolites which promote a heterolytic asymmetric breakage of 
bonds yielding pairs of ions of opposite charges usually a carbocation and the 
very unstable hydride anion carbon localized free radicals and cations are both 
highly unstable and undergo processes of chain rearrangement c c scission in 
position beta i e cracking and intra and intermolecular hydrogen transfer or 
hydride transfer in both types of processes the corresponding reactive 
intermediates radicals ions are permanently regenerated and thus they proceed 
by a self propagating chain mechanism the chain of reactions is eventually 
terminated by radical or ion recombination here is an example of cracking with 
butane ch three ch two ch two ch three one st possibility four eight breaking 
is done on the ch three ch two bond ch three ch two ch two ch three after a 
certain number of steps we will obtain an alkane and an alkene ch four ch two 
ch ch three two nd possibility three eight breaking is done on the ch two ch 
two bond ch three ch two ch two ch three after a certain number of steps we 
will obtain an alkane and an alkene from different types ch three ch three ch 
two ch two three rd possibility one four breaking of a c h bond after a certain 
number of steps we will obtain an alkene and hydrogen gas ch two ch ch two ch 
three h two other reactions alkanes will react with steam in the presence of a 
nickel catalyst to give hydrogen alkanes can by chlorosulfonated and nitrated 
although both reactions require special conditions the fermentation of alkanes 
to carboxylic acids is of some technical importance in the reed reaction sulfur 
dioxide chlorine and light convert hydrocarbons to sulfonyl chlorides hazards 
methane is explosive in when mixed with air one eight ch four and is a strong 
greenhouse gas other lower alkanes can also form explosive mixtures with air 
the lighter liquid alkanes are highly flammable although this risk decreases 
with the length of the carbon chain pentane hexane heptane and octane are 
classed as dangerous for the environment and harmful the straight chain isomer 
of hexane is a neurotoxin and therefore rarely used commercially alkanes in 
nature although alkanes occur in nature in various way they do not rank 
biologically among the essential materials cycloalkanes with one four to one 
eight carbon atoms occur in musk extracted from deer of the family moschidae 
all further information refers to acyclic alkanes bacteria and archaea 
methanogenic archaea in the gut of this cow are responsible for some of the 
methane in the earth s atmosphere certain types of bacteria can metabolise 
alkanes they prefer even numbered carbon chains as they are easier to degrade 
than odd numbered chains on the other hand certain archaea the methanogens 
produce large quantites of methane by the metabolism of carbon dioxide or other 
oxidised organic compounds the energy is released by the oxidation of hydrogen 
co two four h two ch four two h two o methanogens are also the producers of 
marsh gas in wetlands and release about two billion tonnes of methane per year 
the atmospheric content of this gas is produced nearly exclusively by them the 
methane output of cattle and other herbivores which can release up to one five 
zero litres per day and of termites is also due to methanogens they also 
produce this simplest of all alkanes in the intestines of humans methanogenic 
archaea are hence at the end of the carbon cycle with carbon being released 
back into the atmosphere after having been fixed by photosynthesis it is 
probable that our current deposits of natural gas were formed in a similar way 
fungi and plants water forms droplets on a thin film of alkane wax on the skin 
of the apple alkanes also play a role if a minor role in the biology of the 
three eukaryotic groups of organisms fungi plants and animals some specialised 
yeasts e g candida tropicale pichia sp rhodotorula sp can use alkanes as a 
source of carbon and or energy the fungus amorphotheca resinae prefers the 
longer chain alkanes in aviation fuel and can cause serious problems for 
aircraft in tropical regions in plants it is the solid long chain alkanes that 
are found they form a firm layer of wax the cuticle over areas of the plant 
exposed to the air this protects the plant against water loss while preventing 
the leaching of important minerals by the rain it is also a protection against 
bacteria fungi and harmful insects the latter sink with their legs into the 
soft waxlike substance and have difficulty moving the shining layer on fruits 
such as apples consists of long chain alkanes the carbon chains are usually 
between twenty and thirty carbon atoms in length and are made by the plants 
from fatty acids the exact composition of the layer of wax is not only species 
dependent but changes also with the season and such environmental factors as 
lighting conditions temperature or humidity animals alkanes are found in animal 
products although they are less important than unsaturated hydrocarbons on 
example is the shark liver oil which is approximately one four pristane two six 
one zero one four tetramethylpentadecane c one nine h four zero their 
occurrence is more important in pheromones chemical messenger materials on 
which above all insects are dependent for communication with some kinds as the 
support beetle xylotrechus colonus primarily pentacosane c two five h five two 
three methylpentaicosane c two six h five four and nine methylpentaicosane c 
two six h five four they are transferred by body contact with others like the 
tsetse fly glossina morsitans morsitans the pheromone contians the four alkanes 
two methylheptadecane c one eight h three eight one seven two one 
dimethylheptatriacontane c three nine h eight zero one five one nine 
dimethylheptatriacontane c three nine h eight zero and one five one nine two 
three trimethylheptatriacontane c four zero h eight two and acts by smell over 
longer distances a useful characteristic for pest control ecological relations 
early spider orchid ophrys sphegodes one example in which both plant and animal 
alkanes play a role is the ecological relationship between the sand bee andrena 
nigroaenea and the early spider orchid ophrys sphegodes the latter is dependent 
for pollination on the former sand bees use pheromones in order to identify a 
mate in the case of a nigroaenea the females emit a mixture of tricosane c two 
three h four eight pentacosane c two five h five two and heptacosane c two 
seven h five six in the ratio three three one and males are attracted by 
specifically this odour the orchid takes advantage of this mating arrangement 
to get the male bee to collect and disseminate its pollen parts of its flower 
not only resemble the appearance of sand bees but also produce large quantities 
of the three alkanes in the same ratio as female sand bees as a result numerous 
males are lured to the blooms and attempte to copulate with their imaginary 
partner although this endeavour is not crowned with success for the bee it 
allows the orchid to transfer its pollen which will be dispersed after the 
departure of the frustrated male to different blooms see also cycloalkane 
higher alkanes alkene alkyne functional group cracking chemistry list of 
alkanes hydrocarbons alkanes this article is about the legal term for other 
usages see appeal disambiguation an appeal is the act or fact of challenging a 
judicially cognizable and binding judgment to a higher judicial authority in 
common law jurisdictions most commonly this means formally filing a notice of 
appeal with a lower court indicating one s intention to take the matter to the 
next higher court with jurisdiction over the matter and then actually filing 
the appeal with the appropriate appellate court united states the united states 
legal system generally recognizes two types of appeals a trial de novo or an 
appeal on the record a trial de novo is usually available for review of 
informal proceedings conducted by administrative agency referees masters 
commissioners and some minor judicial tribunals in proceedings that do not 
provide all the procedural attributes of a formal judicial trial if 
unchallenged these decisions have the power to settle more minor legal disputes 
once and for all if a party is dissatisfied with the finding of such a tribunal 
one generally has the power to request a trial de novo by a court of record in 
such a proceeding all issues and evidence may be developed newly as though 
never heard before and one is not restricted to the evidence heard in the lower 
proceeding sometimes however the decision of the lower proceeding is itself 
admissible as evidence thus helping to curb frivolous appeals in an appeal on 
the record from a decision in a judicial proceeding both appellant and 
respondent are bound to base their arguments wholly on the proceedings and body 
of evidence as they were presented in the lower tribunal each seeks to prove to 
the higher court that the result they desired was the just result precedent and 
case law figure prominently in the arguments in order for the appeal to succeed 
the appellant must prove that the lower court committed reversible error that 
is an impermissible action by the court acted to cause a result that was unjust 
and which would not have resulted had the court acted properly some examples of 
reversible error would be erroneously instructing the jury on the law 
applicable to the case permitting seriously improper argument by an attorney 
admitting or excluding evidence improperly acting outside the court s 
jurisdiction injecting bias into the proceeding or appearing to do so juror 
misconduct etc the failure to formally object at the time to what one views as 
improper action in the lower court may result in the affirmance of the lower 
court s judgment on the grounds that one did not preserve the issue for appeal 
by objecting in cases where a judge rather than a jury decided issues of fact 
an appellate court will apply an abuse of discretion standard of review under 
this standard the appellate court gives deference to the lower court s view of 
the evidence and reverses its decision only if it was a clear abuse of 
discretion this is usually defined as a decision outside the bounds of 
reasonableness on the other hand the appellate court normally gives less 
deference to a lower court s decision on issues of law and may reverse if it 
finds that the lower court applied the wrong legal standard in some rare cases 
an appellant may successfully argue that the law under which the lower decision 
was rendered was unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or may convince the 
higher court to order a new trial on the basis that evidence earlier sought was 
concealed or only recently discovered in the case of new evidence there must be 
a high probability that its presence or absence would have made a material 
difference in the trial another issue suitable for appeal in criminal cases is 
effective assistance of counsel if a defendant has been convicted and can prove 
that his lawyer did not adequately handle his case and that there is a 
reasonable probability that the result of the trial would have been different 
had the lawyer given competent representation he is entitled to a new trial an 
appellate court is a court that hears cases in which a lower court either a 
trial court or a lower level appellate court has already made a decision but in 
which at least one party to the action wants to challenge this ruling based 
upon some legal grounds that are allowed to be appealed either by right or by 
leave of the appellate court these grounds typically include errors of law fact 
or due process in different jurisdictions appellate courts are also called 
appeals courts courts of appeals superior courts or supreme courts who can 
appeal a party who files an appeal is called an appellant and a party on the 
other side is an appellee or respondent or in some jurisdictions the party who 
files is known as a petitioner and the party being sued is designated the 
respondent cross appeals can also occur when more than one party to a case is 
unhappy with the decision in some way often when the winning party claims that 
more damages were deserved than were awarded an appeal as of right is one that 
is guaranteed by statute or some underlying constitutional or legal principle 
the appellate court cannot refuse to listen to the appeal an appeal by leave or 
permission requires the appellant to move for leave to appeal in such a 
situation either or both of the lower court and the appellate court have the 
discretion to grant or refuse the appellant s demand to appeal the lower court 
s decision in tort equity or other civil matters either party to a previous 
case may file an appeal in criminal matters however the state or prosecution 
generally has no appeal as of right and due to the double jeopardy principle 
the state or prosecution may never appeal a jury or bench verdict but in some 
jurisdictions the state or prosecution may appeal as of right from a trial 
court s dismissal of an indictment in whole or in part or from a trial court s 
granting of a defendant s suppression motion likewise in some jurisdictions the 
state or prosecution may appeal an issue of law by leave from the trial court 
and or the appellate court how an appeal is processed generally speaking the 
appellate court examines the record of evidence presented in the trial court 
and the law that the lower court applied and decides whether that decision was 
legally sound or not the appellate court will typically be deferential to the 
lower court s findings of fact such as whether a defendant committed a 
particular act unless clearly erroneous and so will focus on the court s 
application of the law to those facts such as whether the act found by the 
court to have occurred fits a legal definition at issue if the appellate court 
finds no defect it affirms the judgment if the appellate court does find a 
legal defect in the decision below i e in the lower court it may modify the 
ruling to correct the defect or it may nullify reverse or vacate the whole 
decision or any part of it it may in addition send the case back remand or 
remit to the lower court for further proceedings to remedy the defect in some 
cases an appellate court may review a lower court decision de novo or 
completely challenging even the lower court s findings of fact this might be 
the proper standard of review for example if the lower court resolved the case 
by granting a pre trial motion to dismiss or motion for summary judgment which 
is usually based only upon written submissions to the trial court and not on 
any trial testimony another situation is where appeal is by way of re hearing 
certain jurisdictions permit certain appeals to cause the trial to be heard 
afresh in the appellate court an example would be an appeal from a magistrate s 
court to the crown court in england and wales sometimes the appellate court 
finds a defect in the procedure the parties used in filing the appeal and 
dismisses the appeal without considering its merits which has the same effect 
as affirming the judgment below this would happen for example if the appellant 
waited too long under the appellate court s rules to file the appeal in england 
and many other jurisdictions however the phrase appeal dismissed is equivalent 
to the u s term affirmed and the phrase appeal allowed is equivalent to the u s 
term reversed generally there is no trial in an appellate court only 
consideration of the record of the evidence presented to the trial court and 
all the pre trial and trial court proceedings are reviewed unless the appeal is 
by way of re hearing new evidence will usually only be considered on appeal in 
very rare instances for example if that material evidence was unavailable to a 
party for some very significant reason such as prosecutorial misconduct in some 
systems an appellate court will only consider the written decision of the lower 
court together with any written evidence that was before that court and is 
relevant to the appeal in other systems the appellate court will normally 
consider the record of the lower court in those cases the record will first be 
certified by the lower court the appellant has the opportunity to present 
arguments for the granting of the appeal and the appellee or respondent can 
present arguments against it arguments of the parties to the appeal are 
presented through their appellate lawyers if represented or pro se if the party 
has not engaged legal representation those arguments are presented in written 
briefs and sometimes in oral argument to the court at a hearing at such 
hearings each party is allowed a brief presentation at which the appellate 
judges ask questions based on their review of the record below and the 
submitted briefs it is important to note that in an adversarial system 
appellate courts do not have the power to review lower court decisions unless a 
party appeals it therefore if a lower court has ruled in an improper manner or 
against legal precedent that judgment will stand even if it might have been 
overturned on appeal in the united states a lawyer traditionally starts an oral 
argument to any appellate court with the words may it please the court see also 
list of legal topics appellate review supreme court of the united states court 
of appeal of england and wales court systems appellate review for the us 
radical anti war protest group see a n s w e r see also google answers answers 
com an answer derived from and against and the same root as swear was 
originally a solemn assertion in opposition to some one or something and thus 
generally any counter statement or defence a reply to a question or objection 
or a correct solution of a problem in the common law an answer is the first 
pleading by a defendant usually filed and served upon the plaintiff within a 
certain strict time limit after a civil complaint or criminal information or 
indictment has been served upon the defendant it may have been preceded by an 
optional pre answer motion to dismiss or demurrer if such a motion is 
unsuccessful the defendant must file an answer to the complaint or risk an 
adverse default judgment the answer establishes which allegations cause of 
action in civil matters set forth by the complaining party will be contested by 
the defendant and states all the defendant s defenses thus establishing the 
nature and parameters of the controversy to be decided by the court in the case 
of a criminal case there is usually an arraignment or some other kind of 
appearance before the court by the defendant the pleading in the criminal case 
which is entered on the record in open court is either guilty or not guilty 
generally speaking in private civil cases there is no guilt or innocence there 
is only a judgment that grants money damages or some other kind of equitable 
remedy such as restitution or an injunction criminal cases may lead to fines or 
other punishment such as imprisonment the famous latin responsa prudentum 
answers of the learned were the accumulated views of many successive 
generations of roman lawyers a body of legal opinion which gradually became 
authoritative in music an answer is the technical name in counterpoint for the 
repetition by one part or instrument of a theme proposed by another g sup 
garrett one nine zero two one eight zero seven one nine eight three one eight 
six one one eight seven two one nine six one back one three zero nine one eight 
two seven one nine three one one nine six two arraignment is a common law term 
for the formal reading of a criminal complaint in the presence of the defendant 
to inform him of the charges against him in response to arraignment the accused 
is expected to enter a plea acceptable pleas vary from jurisdiction to 
jurisdiction but they generally include guilty not guilty and the peremptory 
pleas or pleas in bar which set out reasons why a trial cannot proceed in 
addition us jurisdictions allow pleas of nolo contendere no contest and the 
alford plea in some circumstances in the uk arraignment is the first of eleven 
stages in a criminal trial and involves the clerk of the court reading out the 
indictment the defendant is asked whether they plead guilty or not guilty to 
each individual charge guilty and not guilty pleas if the defendant pleads 
guilty an evidentiary hearing usually follows the court is not required to 
accept a guilty plea during that hearing the judge will assess the offense 
mitigating factors and the defendant s character and then pass sentence if the 
defendant pleads not guilty a date will be set for a preliminary hearing or 
trial what if the defendant enters no plea in the past a defendant who refused 
to plea or stood mute would be subjected to peine forte et dure law french for 
strong and hard punishment but today in all common law jurisdictions defendants 
who refuse to enter a plea will have a plea of not guilty entered for them on 
their behalf the federal rules of criminal procedure the us federal rules of 
criminal procedure state arraignment shall consist of an open reading of the 
indictment to the defendant and calling on him to plead thereto he shall be 
given a copy of the indictment before he is called upon to plead legal terms 
prosecution america the beautiful is an american patriotic song which rivals 
the star spangled banner the national anthem of the united states in popularity 
it is often found in christian hymnals in a wide variety of churches in the 
united states and may be sung as part of a christian service of worship to god 
history the words are by katharine lee bates an english teacher at wellesley 
college she had taken a train trip to colorado springs colorado in one eight 
nine three to teach a short summer school session at colorado college and 
several of the sights on her trip found their way into her poem the world s 
columbian exposition in chicago illinois the white city with its promise of the 
future contained within its alabaster buildings the wheat fields of kansas 
through which her train was riding on july four the majestic view of the great 
plains from atop pike s peak on that mountain the words of the poem started to 
come to her and she wrote them down upon returning to her hotel room at the 
original antlers hotel the poem was initially published two years later in the 
congregationalist to commemorate the fourth of july it quickly caught the 
public s fancy amended versions were published in one nine zero four and one 
nine one three several existing pieces of music were adapted to the poem the 
hymn materna composed in one eight eight two by samuel a ward was generally 
considered the best music as early as one nine one zero and is still the 
popular tune today ward had been similarly inspired the tune came to him while 
he was on a ferryboat trip from coney island back to his home in new york city 
after a leisurely summer day and he immediately wrote it down ward died in one 
nine zero three not knowing the national stature his music would attain miss 
bates was more fortunate as the song s popularity was well established by her 
death in one nine two nine at various times in the more than one zero zero 
years that have elapsed since the song as we know it was born particularly 
during the john f kennedy administration there have been efforts to give 
america the beautiful legal status either as a national hymn or as a national 
anthem equal to or in place of the star spangled banner but so far this has not 
succeeded proponents prefer america the beautiful for various reasons saying it 
is easier to sing more melodic and more adaptable to new orchestrations while 
still remaining as easily recognizable as the star spangled banner some prefer 
america the beautiful over the star spangled banner due to the latter s war 
oriented imagery others prefer the star spangled banner for the same reason 
while that national dichotomy has stymied any effort at changing the tradition 
of the national anthem america the beautiful continues to be held in high 
esteem by a large number of americans popularity of the song soared following 
the september one one two zero zero one attacks at some sporting events it was 
sung in addition to the traditional singing of the national anthem ray charles 
is credited with the song s most well known rendition in current times although 
elvis presley had a good success with it in the seven zero s his recording is 
very commonly played at major sporting events such as the super bowl his unique 
take on it places the third verse first after which he sings the usual first 
verse in the third verse see below the author scolds the materialistic and self 
serving robber barons of her day and urges america to live up to its noble 
ideals and to honor with both word and deed the memory of those who died for 
their country a message that resonates just as strongly today an amusing oddity 
of the song is that its meter technically common meter double or eight six 
eight six eight six eight six is identical to that of auld lang syne the two 
songs can be sung perfectly with lyrics interchanged lyrics oh beautiful for 
spacious skies for amber waves of grain for purple mountain majesties above the 
fruited plain america america god shed his grace on thee and crown thy good 
with brotherhood from sea to shining sea oh beautiful for pilgrims feet whose 
stern impassioned stress a thoroughfare for freedom beat across the wilderness 
america america god mend thine ev ry flaw confirm thy soul in self control thy 
liberty in law oh beautiful for heroes proved in liberating strife who more 
than self their country loved and mercy more than life america america may god 
thy gold refine til all success be nobleness and ev ry gain divine oh beautiful 
for patriot s dream that sees beyond the years thine alabaster cities gleam 
undimmed by human tears america america god shed his grace on thee and crown 
thy good with brotherhood from sea to shining sea takeoffs a song as popular 
and familiar as america the beautiful inevitably gets used out of its proper 
context or time frame for humorous effect as the song seems to have always been 
there it is often presented as if christopher columbus had written it when he 
arrived at the new world though in fact columbus never set foot on north 
america all his voyages were to the caribbean islands south and central america 
some examples in one nine seven one the song inspired the cross country 
cannonball baker sea to shining sea memorial trophy dash race from new york to 
los angeles that later was the topic of several movies with burt reynolds a far 
side cartoon from one nine eight two reprinted in sherr s book shows columbus 
nearing land with his crew of conquistador types and saying look gentlemen 
purple mountains spacious skies fruited plains is someone writing this down in 
one of his comedy club routines in the early one nine six zero s flip wilson 
did a columbus story with an african american twist ironically the catchphrase 
repeated by queen isabel an early geraldine is chris gon find ray charles when 
his columbus sees land he comments it s america all right just look at those 
spacious skies those amber waves of grain dig that purple mountain s majesty i 
ll bet there s fruit out there on the plain in his satirical musical record 
album the united states of america volume one stan freberg plays columbus jesse 
white plays a skeptical king ferdinand and colleen collins does queen isabella 
mimicking tallulah bankhead resulting in this bit of dialogue ferdinand look at 
him in that hat is that a crazy sailor isabella crazy i ll tell you how crazy 
he s a man with a dream a vision a vision of a new world whose alabaster cities 
gleam undimmed by human tears with purple mountain majesties above the two 
cents plain ferdinand and columbus fruited isabella fruited mel brooks on a 
talk show once did an impression of how frank sinatra might sing the song 
complete with tuxedo black hat and coat and cigarette leaning up against a bar 
and rendering the song in lounge style george carlin performed a satirical 
version around one nine seven zero when environmental issues were becoming a 
hot political topic oh beautiful for smoggy skies insecticided grain for strip 
mined mountain s majesty above the asphalt plain america america man sheds his 
waste on thee and hides the pines with billboard signs from sea to oily sea 
wellesley college students and alumnae tend to change brotherhood to sisterhood 
in renditions of the song books lynn sherr s two zero zero one book america the 
beautiful discusses the origins of the song and the backgrounds of its authors 
in depth isbn one five eight six four eight zero eight five five sources 
external links one nine one three lyrics eight stanzas lyrics four stanzas a 
national treasure the antlers hotel history where katherine lee bates penned 
america the beautiful click on history on the top left hand corner of index to 
access page midi file of america the beautiful from the cyber hymnal mp three 
of america the beautiful as performed by the united states continental army 
band patriotic songs christian hymns assistive technology at is a generic term 
that includes assistive adaptive and rehabilitative devices and the process 
used in selecting locating and using them at promotes greater independence for 
people with disabilities by enabling them to perform tasks that they were 
formerly unable to accomplish or had great difficulty accomplishing by 
providing enhancements to or changed methods of interacting with the technology 
needed to accomplish such tasks according to disability advocates technology 
all too often is created without regard to people with disabilities and 
unnecessary barriers make new technology inaccessible to hundreds of millions 
universal or broadened accessibility or universal design means excellent 
usability particularly for people with disabilities but argue advocates of 
assistive technology universally accessible technology yields great rewards to 
the typical user good accessible design is universal design they say the 
classic example of an assistive technology that has improved everyone s life is 
the curb cuts in the sidewalk at street crossings while these curb cuts surely 
enable pedestrians with mobility impairments to cross the street they have also 
aided parents with carriages and strollers shoppers with carts and travellers 
and workers with pull type bags not to mention skateboarders and inline skaters 
consider an example of an assistive technology the modern telephone is except 
for the deaf universally accessible combined with a text telephone also known 
as a tdd telephone device for the deaf and in the usa generally called a 
ttyteletypewriter which converts typed characters into tones that may be sent 
over the telephone line the deaf person is able to communicate immediately at a 
distance together with relay services where an operator reads what the deaf 
person types and types what a hearing person says the deaf person is then given 
access to everyone s telephone not just those of people who possess text 
telephones many telephones now have volume controls which are primarily 
intended for the benefit of people who are hard of hearing but can be useful 
for all users at times and places where there is significant background noise 
another example calculators are cheap but a person with a mobility impairment 
can have difficulty using them speech recognition software could recognize 
short commands and make use of calculators a little easier people with 
cognitive disabilities would appreciate the simplicity others would as well 
toys which have been adapted to be used by children with disabilities may have 
advantages for typical children as well the lekotek movement assists parents by 
lending assistive technology toys and expertise to families telecare is a 
particular sort of assistive technology that uses electronic sensors connected 
to an alarm system to help caregivers manage risk and help vulnerable people 
stay independent at home longer a good example would be the systems being put 
in place for senior people such as fall detectors thermometers for hypothermia 
risk flooding and unlit gas sensors for people with mild dementia the principle 
being that these alerts can be customised to the particular person s risks when 
the alert is triggered a message is sent to a carer or contact centre who can 
respond appropriately the range of sensors is wide and expanding rapidly 
technology similar to telecare can also be used to act within a person s home 
rather than just to respond to a detected crisis using one of the examples 
above unlit gas sensors for people with dementia can be used to trigger a 
device that turns off the gas and tells someone what has happened this is safer 
than just telling an external person that there is a problem designing for 
people with dementia is a good example of where the design of the interface of 
a piece of assistive technology at is critical to its usefulness it is 
important to make sure that people with dementia or any other identified user 
group are involved in the design process to make sure that the design is 
accessible and useable in the example above a voice message could be used to 
remind the person with dementia to turn of the gas himself but who s voice 
should be used and what should the message say questions like these must be 
answered through user consultantion involvement and evaluation assistive 
technology products standing frames support wheelchair users in a standing 
position increasing their reach as well as improving their health and self 
esteem magnifiers magnify computer displays for people with some degree of 
visual impairment sticky keys a feature of microsoft windows and mac os x 
operating systems allowing key combinations such as control alt delete to be 
pressed in sequence rather than simultaneously screen readers allow blind 
people to use computers by communicating what is on the screen via speech or 
braille refreshable braille display used to convert on screen text to braille 
characters reading machines allow blind people to access printed material cctv 
closed circuit television or video magnifier magnifies printed text for people 
with low vision further reading behrmann m an emerging way to touch the future 
amherst ma mcgowan publications mckeown s two zero zero zero unlocking 
potential how ict can support children with special needs the questions 
publishing company ltd isbn one eight four one nine zero zero four one nine 
nisbet p one four one two one zero pubmed id two three four two zero eight one 
adlam t et al the installation and support of internationally distributed 
equipment for people with dementia ieee transactions on information technology 
in biomedicine one zero eight nine seven seven seven one yr two zero zero four 
vol eight iss three pg two five three two five seven download from ieee six 
nine four k pdf external links assistive technology product database american 
foundation for the blind accessworld technology and people with visual 
impairments integrating assistive technology into the standard curriculum 
assistive technology for students with mild disabilities assistive technology 
for students with mild disabilities inclusive technology special needs articles 
and information pages european organisations for assistive technology the 
association for the advancement of assistive technology in europe aaate uk 
based organisations for assistive technology the aidis trust the disabled 
living foundation abilitynet the call centre communication matters fast 
research and development organisations events and jobs including assistive 
technology at forum national library for the blind access technology primer 
rnib technology information service rnid technology uk dept of health page on 
telecare the ace centres bath institute of medical engineering bime a medical 
engineering design and development charity north american organizations for 
assistive technology rehabilitation engineering assistive technology society of 
north america abledata global database of at and rehab products the alliance 
for technology access assistive technology industry association the family 
center on technology and disability accessibility assistive technology 
disability educational technology accessible computing covers assistive 
technology accessible software accessible web legal issues in accessible 
computing united states private lawsuits section five zero eight amendment to 
the rehabilitation act of one nine seven three accessibility assistive 
technology human computer interaction an abacus is a calculation tool often 
constructed as a wooden frame with beads sliding on wires it was in use 
centuries before the adoption of the written hindu arabic numeral system and is 
still widely used by merchants and clerks in china and elsewhere the origins of 
the abacus are disputed suggestions including invention in babylonia and in 
china to have taken place between two four zero zero bc and three zero zero bc 
the first abacus was almost certainly based on a flat stone covered with sand 
or dust lines were drawn in the sand and pebbles used to aid calculations from 
this a variety of abaci were developed the most popular were based on the bi 
quinary system using a combination of two bases base two and base five to 
represent decimal numbers the use of the word abacus dates back to before one 
three eight seven when a middle english work borrowed the word from latin to 
describe a sandboard abacus the latin word came from abakos the greek genitive 
form of abax calculating table because abax also had the sense of table 
sprinkled with sand or dust used for drawing geometric figures it is speculated 
by some linguists that the greek word may be derived from a semitic root b q 
the hebrew word for dust though details of the transmission are obscure it may 
also be derived from the phoenician word abak meaning sand the plural of abacus 
is abaci babylonian abacus a tablet found on the island of salamis near greece 
in one eight four six dates back to the babylonians of three zero zero bc 
making it the oldest counting board discovered so far it was originally thought 
to be a gaming board its construction is a slab of white marble measuring one 
four nine cm in length seven five cm in width and four five cm thick on which 
are five groups of markings in the center of the tablet are a set of five 
parallel lines equally divided by a vertical line capped with a semi circle at 
the intersection of the bottom most horizontal line and the single vertical 
line below these lines is a wide space with a horizontal crack dividing it 
below this crack is another group of eleven parallel lines again divided into 
two sections by a line perpendicular to them but with the semi circle at the 
top of the intersection the third sixth and ninth of these lines are marked 
with a cross where they intersect with the vertical line roman abacus 
reconstruction of roman abacus the late empire roman abacus shown here in 
reconstruction contains eight long and eight shorter grooves the former having 
up to five beads in each and the latter one the groove marked i indicates units 
x tens and so on up to millions the beads in the shorter grooves denote fives 
five units five tens etc essentially in a bi quinary coded decimal system 
obviously related to the roman numerals the short grooves on the right may have 
been used for marking roman ounces computations are made by means of beads 
which would probably have been slid up and down the grooves to indicate the 
value of each column chinese abacus the suanpan of the chinese is similar to 
the roman abacus in principle though has a different construction and it was 
designed to do both decimal and hexadecimal arithmetics chinese abacus the 
suanpan the chinese abacus is typically around two zero cm eight inches tall 
and it comes in various widths depending on the application it usually has more 
than seven rods there are two beads on each rod in the upper deck and five 
beads each in the bottom for both decimal and hexadecimal computation the beads 
are usually rounded and made of a hard wood the beads are counted by moving 
them up or down towards the beam the abacus can be reset to the starting 
position instantly by a quick jerk along the horizontal axis to spin all the 
beads away from the horizontal beam at the center chinese abaci can be used for 
functions other than counting unlike the simple counting board used in 
elementary schools very efficient suanpan techniques have been developed to do 
multiplication division addition subtraction square root and cube root 
operations at high speed bead arithmetic is the calculating technique used with 
various types of abaci in particular the chinese abacus japanese abacus soroban 
the japanese eliminated first one bead from the upper deck and later another 
bead from the lower deck in each column of the chinese abacus the japanese also 
eliminated the use of qiuchu chinese division table the method of chinese 
division table was still used when there were five lower beads there came the 
war of the multiplication table versus the division table the school of 
multiplication table prevailed in one nine two zero s the rods number of digits 
increase to usually two one two three two seven or even three one thus allowing 
calculation for more digits soroban is taught in elementary schools as a part 
of lessons in mathematics when teaching the soroban a song like instruction is 
given by the tutor the soroban is about eight cm three inches tall the beads on 
a soroban are usually shaped as a double cone bi cone to facilitate ease of 
movement often primary students may bring along with them two sorobans one with 
one upper bead and five lower beads the other with one upper bead with four 
lower beads when they learn soroban in school the size of beads of soroban is 
standardized and they come in two types the japanese classified soroban for 
native japanese and a separate size for foreigners since westerners tend to be 
larger than most japanese and therefore have larger hands and fingers the 
soroban that are for foreigners are made with a plastic pipe on both the left 
and right side of the frame while ones made for native japanese were all made 
with wooden frames in this way the thickness of the soroban for foreigners is 
higher rendering it easier for the non japanese to manipulate japanese soroban 
russian abacus russian abacus the russian abacus the schoty or sjotty usually 
has a single slanted deck with ten beads on each wire except one wire which has 
four and acts as a separator or for fractions this wire is usually near the 
user the russian abacus is often used vertically with wires from left to right 
in the manner of a book the wires are usually bowed to bulge upward in the 
center in order to keep the beads pinned to either of the two sides it is 
cleared when all the beads are moved to the right during manipulation beads are 
moved to the left for easy viewing the middle two beads on each wire the five 
th and six th bead usually have a colour different to the other eight beads 
likewise the left bead of the thousands wire and the million wire if present 
may have a different color the russian abacus is still in common use today in 
shops and markets throughout the former soviet union although it is no longer 
taught in most schools school abacus school abacus used in danish elementary 
school early two zero th century around the world abaci have been used in pre 
schools and elementary schools as an aid in teaching arithmetics in western 
countries a bead frame similar to the russian abacus but with straight wires 
has been common see image it is still often seen as a plastic or wooden toy 
uses by the visually impaired abaci are still commonly used by individuals who 
have visual impairments they use an abacus to perform the mathematical 
functions multiplication division addition subtraction square root and cubic 
root a piece of soft fabric or rubber is placed behind the beads so that they 
don t move inadvertently this keeps the beads in place while the user feels or 
manipulates them recently abaci have been replaced to some extent by electronic 
calculators with speech but only in those countries where they are easily 
available and affordable however even when they are available many visually 
impaired people still prefer to use the abacus in addition many blind children 
are required to learn how to use the abacus before they are permitted the use 
of a talking calculator or similar device this can be compared to sighted 
children being required to learn how to solve mathematical problems on paper 
before they are allowed the use of a calculator native american abacus some 
sources mention the use of an abacus called a nepohualtzintzin in ancient mayan 
culture this mesoamerican abacus uses the five digit base two zero mayan 
numeral system the khipu of the inkas was a system of knotted cords used to 
record numerical data like advanced tally sticks but was not used to perform 
calculations see also chisenbop slide rule napier s bones history of computing 
history of computing hardware abacus logic mental abacus positional notation 
external links general and historical articles abacus photos and images abacus 
roman abacus tutorials bernazzani s soroban abacus handbook min multimedia suan 
pan abacus mystery of the bead an abacus manual abacus curiosities abacus in 
various number systems at cut the knot java applet of chinese japanese and 
russian abaci an atomic scale abacus ancient rome mathematical tools mechanical 
calculators an acid often represented by the generic formula ha is a water 
soluble sour tasting chemical compound that when dissolved in water gives a 
solution with a ph of less than seven definitions of acids and bases the word 
acid comes from the latin acidus meaning sour but in chemistry the term acid 
has a more specific meaning there are three common ways to define an acid 
namely the arrhenius the br nsted lowry and the lewis definitions in order of 
increasing generality arrhenius according to this definition an acid is a 
substance that increases the concentration of hydronium ion h three o when 
dissolved in water while bases are substances that increase the concentration 
of hydroxide ions oh this definition limits acids and bases to substances that 
can dissolve in water around one eight zero zero many french chemists including 
antoine lavoisier incorrectly believed that all acids contained oxygen english 
chemists including sir humphry davy at the same time believed all acids 
contained hydrogen the swedish chemist svante arrhenius used this belief to 
develop this definition of acid br nsted lowry according to this definition an 
acid is a proton donor and a base is a proton acceptor the acid is said to be 
dissociated after the proton is donated an acid and the corresponding base are 
referred to conjugate acid base pairs br nsted and lowry formulated this 
definition which includes water insoluble substances not in the arrhenius 
definition lewis according to this definition an acid as an electron pair 
acceptor and a base is an electron pair donor these are frequently referred to 
as lewis acids and lewis bases and are electrophiles and nucleophiles in 
organic chemistry lewis acids include substances with no protons such as iron 
iii chloride the lewis definition can also be explained with molecular orbital 
theory in general an acid can receive an electron pair in its lowest unoccupied 
orbital lumo from the highest occupied orbital homo of a base that is the homo 
from the base and the lumo from the acid combine to a bonding molecular orbital 
this definition was developed by gilbert n lewis although not the most general 
theory the br nsted lowry definition is the most widely used definition the 
strength of an acid may be understood by this defintion by the stability of 
hydronium and the solvated conjugate base upon dissociation increasing 
stability of the the conjugate base will increase the acidity of a compound 
this concept of acidity is used frequently for organic acids such as carboxylic 
acid the molecular orbital description where the unfilled proton orbital 
overlaps with a lone pair is connected to the lewis definition solutions of 
weak acids and salts of their conjugate bases form buffer solutions acid base 
systems are different from redox reactions in that there is no change in 
oxidation state generally acids have the following chemical and physical 
properties taste acids generally are sour when dissolved in water touch acids 
produce a stinging feeling particularly strong acids reactivity acids react 
aggressively with or corrode most metals electrical conductivity acids are 
electrolytes strong acids are dangerous causing severe burns for even minor 
contact generally acid burns are treated by rinsing the affected area 
abundantly with water and followed up with immediate medical attention 
nomenclature acids are named according to the ending of their anion that ionic 
ending is dropped and replaced with a new suffix according to the table below 
for example hcl has chloride as its anion so the ide suffix makes it take the 
form hydrochloric acid chemical characteristics in water the following 
equilibrium occurs between an acid ha and water which acts as a base ha aq h 
three o aq a aq the acidity constant or acid dissociation constant is the 
equilibrium constant for the reaction of ha with water k a three mbox cdota 
over ha strong acids have large k a values i e the reaction equilibrium lies 
far to the right the acid is almost completely dissociated to h three o and a 
strong acids include the heavier hydrohalic acids hydrochloric acid hcl 
hydrobromic acid hbr and hydroiodic acid hi however hydrofluoric acid hf is 
relatively weak for example the k a value for hydrochloric acid hcl is one zero 
seven weak acids have small k a values i e at equilibrium significant amounts 
of ha and a exist together in solution modest levels of h three o are present 
the acid is only partially dissociated for example the ka value for acetic acid 
is one eight x one zero five most organic acids are weak acids oxoacids which 
tend to contain central atoms in high oxidation states surrounded by oxygen may 
be quite strong or weak nitric acid sulfuric acid and perchloric acid are all 
strong acids whereas nitrous acid sulfurous acid and hypochlorous acid are all 
weak note the following the terms hydrogen ion and proton are used 
interchangebly both refer to h in aqueous solution the water is protonated to 
form hydronium ion h three o aq this is often abbreviated as h aq even though 
the symbol is not chemically correct the strength of an acid is measured by its 
acid dissociation constant k a or equivalently its p k a p k a log k a the ph 
of a solution is a measurement of the concentration of hydronium this will 
depend of the concnetration and nature of acids and bases in solution 
polyprotic acids polyprotic acids are able to donate more than one proton per 
acid molecule in contrast to monoprotic acids that only donate one proton per 
molecule specific types of polyprotic acids have more specific names such as 
diprotic acid two potenital protons to donate and triprotic acid three 
potenital protons to donate a monoprotic acid can undergo one dissociation 
sometimes called ionization as follows and simply has one acid dissociation 
constant as shown above ha aq h two o l h three o aq a aq k a a diprotic acid 
here symbolized by h two a can undergo one or two dissociations depending on 
the ph each dissociation has its own dissociation constant ka one and ka two h 
two a aq h two o l h three o aq ha aq k a one ha aq h two o l h three o aq a 
two aq k a two the first dissociation constant is typically greater than the 
second i e k a one k a two for example sulfuric acid h two so four can donate 
one proton to form the bisulfate anion hso four for which k a one is very large 
then it can donate a second proton to form the sulfate anion so four two 
wherein the k a two is intermediate strength the large k a one for the first 
dissociation makes sulfuric a strong acid in a similar manner the weak unstable 
carbonic acid h two co three can lose one proton to form bicarbonate anion hco 
three and lose a second to form carbonate anion co three two both k a values 
are small but k a one k a two a triprotic acid h three a can undergo one two or 
three dissociations and has three dissociation constants where k a one k a two 
k a three h three a aq h two o l h three o aq h two a aq k a one h two a aq h 
two o l h three o aq ha two aq k a two ha two aq h two o l h three o aq a three 
aq k a three an inorganic example of a triprotic acid is orthophosphoric acid h 
three po four usually just called phosphoric acid all three protons can be 
successively lost to yield h two po four then hpo four two and finally po four 
three the orthophosphate ion usually just called phosphate an organic example 
of a triprotic acid is citric acid which can successively lose three protons to 
finally form the citrate ion even though the positions of the protons on the 
original molecule may be equivalent the successive k a values will differ since 
it is energetically less favorable to lose a proton if the conjugate base is 
more negatively charged neutralization neutralization is the reaction between 
equal amounts of an acid and a base producing a salt and water for example 
hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide form sodium chloride and water hcl aq 
naoh aq h two o l nacl aq neutralization is the basis of titration where a ph 
indicator shows equivalence point when the equivalent number of moles of a base 
have been added to an acid common acids strong inorganic acids hydrobromic acid 
hydrochloric acid hydroiodic acid nitric acid sulfuric acid perchloric acid 
medium to weak inorganic acids boric acid carbonic acid chloric acid 
hydrofluoric acid phosphoric acid pyrophosphoric acid weak organic acids acetic 
acid benzoic acid butyric acid citric acid formic acid lactic acid malic acid 
mandelic acid methanethiol propionic acid pyruvic acid valeric acid acids in 
food acetic acid e two six zero found in vinegar adipic acid e three five five 
alginic acid e four zero zero ascorbic acid vitamin c e three zero zero found 
in fruits benzoic acid e two one zero boric acid e two eight four citric acid e 
three three zero found in citrus fruits carbonic acid e two nine zero found in 
carbonated soft drinks carminic acid e one two zero cyclamic acid e nine five 
two erythorbic acid e three one five erythorbin acid e three one seven formic 
acid e two three six found in bee and ant stings fumaric acid e two nine seven 
gluconic acid e five seven four glutamic acid e six two zero guanylic acid e 
six two six hydrochloric acid e five zero seven inosinic acid e six three zero 
lactic acid e two seven zero found in dairy products such as yoghurt and sour 
milk also is product of cellular fermentation the reason muscles burn malic 
acid e two nine six metatartaric acid e three five three methanethiol found in 
cheese and some other fermented foods niacin nicotinic acid e three seven five 
oxalic acid found in spinach and rhubarb pectic acid found in fruits and some 
vegetables phosphoric acid e three three eight propionic acid e two eight zero 
sorbic acid e two zero zero found in foods and drinks stearic acid e five seven 
zero a type of fatty acid succinic acid e three six three sulfuric acid e five 
one three tannic acid found in tea tartaric acid e three three four found in 
grapes sources listing of strengths of common acids and bases zumdahl chemistry 
four th edition see also acid number chemical substances acids arabic words the 
term asphalt is often used as an abbreviation for asphalt concrete asphalt is a 
sticky black and highly viscous liquid or semi solid that is present in most 
crude petroleums and in some natural deposits asphalt is composed almost 
entirely of bitumen there is some disagreement amongst chemists regarding the 
structure of asphalt however it is most commonly modeled as a colloid with 
asphaltenes as the dispersed phase and maltenes as the continuous phase asphalt 
is sometimes confused with tar which is an artificial material produced by the 
destructive distillation of organic matter tar is also predominantly composed 
of bitumen however the bitumen content of tar is typically lower than that of 
asphalt tar and asphalt have very different engineering properties asphalt can 
be separated from the other components in crude oil such as naphtha gasoline 
and diesel by the process of fractional distillation usually under vacuum 
conditions a better separation can be achieved by further processing of the 
heavier fractions of the crude oil in a de asphalting unit which uses either 
propane or butane in a supercritical phase to dissolve the lighter molecules 
which are then separated further processing is possible by blowing the product 
namely reacting it with oxygen this makes the product harder and more viscous 
natural deposits of asphalt include lake asphalts primarily from the pitch lake 
in trinidad and tobago and bermudez lake in venezuela gilsonite the dead sea in 
israel and tar sands asphalt is rather hard to transport in bulk it hardens 
unless kept very hot so it is sometimes mixed with diesel oil or kerosene 
before shipping upon delivery these lighter materials are separated out of the 
mixture this mixture is often called bitumen feedstock or bfs the largest use 
of asphalt is for making asphalt concrete for pavements which accounts for 
approximately eight zero of the asphalt consumed in the united states roofing 
shingles account for most of the remaining asphalt consumption other uses 
include cattle sprays fence post treatments and waterproofing for fabrics in 
the ancient middle east natural asphalt deposits were used for mortar between 
bricks and stones ship caulk and waterproofing the persian word for asphalt is 
mumiya which may be the source for the english word mummy references barth 
edwin j asphalt science and technology gordon and breach one nine six two isbn 
zero six seven seven zero zero zero four zero five external links black stuff 
hawaii asphalt pavement guide petroleum products construction pavements the 
american national standards institute ansi is a nonprofit organization that 
oversees the development of standards for products services processes and 
systems in the united states the organization also coordinates u s standards 
with international standards so that american products can be used worldwide 
for example standards make sure that people who own cameras can find the film 
they need for them anywhere around the globe the american national standards 
institute approves standards that are developed by representatives of standards 
developing organizations government agencies consumer groups companies and 
others these standards make sure that the characteristics and performance of 
products are consistent that people use the same definitions and terms and that 
products are tested the same way ansi accredits organizations that carry out 
product or personnel certification in accordance with requirements defined in 
international standards the ansi accreditation programs conform to 
international guidelines as verified by government and peer review assessments 
in one nine one eight five engineering societies and three government agencies 
founded the american engineering standards committee aesc the aesc became the 
american standards association asa in one nine two eight in one nine six six 
the asa was reorganized and became the united states of america standards 
institute usasi the present name was adopted in one nine six nine the 
organization s headquarters are in washington d c for more information see its 
web site at http www ansi org the asa photographic exposure system became the 
basis for the iso film speed system currently used worldwide in microsoft 
windows the phrase ansi refers to the windows ansi code pages most of these are 
fixed width though there are some variable width ones for ideographic languages 
some of these are very close to the iso eight eight five nine series leading 
many to falsely assume that they are identical ascii art which is colorized or 
animated by way of ansi terminal control codes x three six four sequences are 
commonly referred to as ansi art and were predominantly popular on bulletin 
board systems throughout the one nine eight zero s and one nine nine zero s see 
also american national standards institute nanotechnology standards panel ansi 
nsp american national standards institute homeland security standards panel 
ansi hssp american national standards institute healthcare information 
technology standards panel ansi hitsp ansi art art created from a subset of x 
three six four ansi sys a device driver for ms dos ansi escape codes unified 
thread standard external links american national standards institute official 
website ansi overview ansi historical overview online char ascii hex binary 
base six four etc encoder decoder standards organizations anchorage is a 
unified home rule municipality officially called the municipality of anchorage 
in the u s state of alaska it is also a census area with two six zero two eight 
three residents according to the two zero zero zero census anchorage is the 
largest city in the state of alaska composing more than two fifths of the state 
s population a state of alaska demographer in two zero zero four estimates the 
population at two seven seven four nine eight anchorage was founded in one nine 
one five and named after a place where a ship lies at anchor its official 
nickname is the city of lights and flowers garden writers call anchorage the 
hanging basket capital of the world when it comes to the city s one zero zero 
zero zero zero hanging baskets and aviation buffs refer to the city as the air 
crossroads of the world because of its geographical location between the two 
northern continents in downtown anchorage along the streets and sidewalks are 
four two five baskets of bright gold triploid marigold drenched with trailing 
sapphire lobelia the blue and gold flowers represent the colors of the 
municipality of anchorage flag and the alaska state flag the city of anchorage 
blooms with vibrant color during the late spring and summer when it comes to 
flowers today anchorage has many features of a modern urban area such as parks 
and forests bike and city trails skiing and cross country ski trails business 
and commerce theaters and other entertainments the tourist industry is strong 
and offers many activities and attractions history russia was well established 
in north america by the one eight zero zero s in one eight six seven u s 
secretary of state william h seward brokered a deal to purchase alaska from 
debt ridden russia for seven two million about two cents an acre alaska s value 
was not appreciated by the american masses at that time calling it seward s 
folly seward s icebox and walrussia by one eight eight eight gold was 
discovered along turnagain arm in one nine one two alaska became a united 
states territory anchorage was carefully laid out by city planners in one nine 
one four originally as a railroad construction port for the alaska railroad and 
on july nine one nine one five the first sale of town lots was held in one nine 
one five president woodrow wilson authorized funds for the construction of the 
alaska railroad that same year the anchorage chamber of commerce was formed 
ship creek landing in anchorage was selected as the headquarters of this effort 
soon a tent city sprang up at the mouth of ship creek and the population 
quickly swelled to more than two zero zero zero would be entrepreneurs flocked 
to this bustling frontier town and they brought with them everything necessary 
to build a city a popular hardware and clothing store the anchorage was 
actually an old dry docked steamship named berth although the area had been 
known by various names the u s post office department formalized the use of the 
name anchorage and despite some protests the name stuck in one nine two zero 
the united states government relinquished its direct control over the city and 
elections were held anchorage was incorporated on november two three one nine 
two zero in one nine two three william mulcahy establishes the anchorage 
baseball league mulcahy was a baseball fan who was working as the alaska 
railroad station auditor assistant and established the baseball league in his 
spare time later in life mulcahy introduced little league baseball and 
established the city s ymca the mulcahy park stadium and ball field were named 
in his honor for his contributions to early anchorage the one nine three zero s 
were a time that anchorage rebounded from the loss of population and industry 
it had suffered during world war i air transportation became increasingly 
important to anchorage in one nine three zero the original park strip landing 
field was replaced by a new facility merrill field which had a beacon and a 
control tower and in a few short years it became one of the busiest centers of 
civilian aircraft activity in the united states in one nine three seven 
providence alaska medical center opened its doors the arrival of us army troops 
in one nine four zero marked a decade of growth based on military expansion for 
anchorage growth spurted in the one nine four zero s with the construction of 
elmendorf air force base and fort richardson which made anchorage a major 
defense center in one nine four zero a canal was built connecting lake spenard 
with lake hood making it the world s largest seaplane base the outbreak of 
world war ii with the threat of a japanese invasion prompted continued 
expansion of military personnel and aircraft and later the pressures of the 
cold war between the united states and the soviet union ensured continued heavy 
military investment in the anchorage area in one nine four seven the parking 
meter was introduced in anchorage and in one nine four nine the first traffic 
lights were installed on fourth avenue between one nine three nine and one nine 
five zero anchorage s population spurted from four two three zero to three zero 
zero six zero and the cost of living soared anchorage also experienced an 
unfortunate rise in crime during this tumultuous growth period a problem the 
city would fight for decades the decade of the one nine five zero s was also 
eventful in one nine five one came the opening of the seward highway on 
december one zero one nine five one anchorage established itself as the air 
crossroads of the world when anchorage international airport opened with 
transpolar airline traffic flying between western europe and east asia the new 
airport also became a refueling stop for flights between the contiguous four 
eight states and east asia until nonstop flights became practical around one 
nine seven zero with the boeing seven four seven airliner in one nine five 
three health care expanded with the opening of the alaska native medical center 
also three volcanoes erupted in the area including mount spurr which dumped 
several inches of ash on anchorage ktva the city s first television station 
began broadcasting in one nine five three in one nine five four the alyeska 
resort was established in one nine five seven oil was discovered on the kenai 
peninsula on january three one nine five nine alaska joined the union as the 
four nine th state the decade of the one nine six zero s began on a bright note 
for anchorage after alaska s attaining statehood after alaska became a state 
anchorage faced a severe housing shortage which was solved partially by 
suburban expansion in january one nine six four anchorage became both a city 
and a borough but on march two seven one nine six four anchorage was hit by the 
good friday earthquake which registered nine two on the richter scale and 
caused tremendous destruction in south alaska this earthquake was the strongest 
ever recorded in north america and united states history and anchorage lay only 
seven five miles one two zero km from the epicenter it killed one three one 
people across south central alaska and property damage was estimated at over 
three zero zero million one nine six four dollars the brand new j c penney 
department store in anchorage was flattened anchorage s remarkable recovery 
from this disaster dominated life in the late one nine six zero s the continued 
threat of earthquakes has prompted a limit on the height of buildings in the 
city the tallest buildings are two one stories high in one nine six eight 
kincaid park was created in south anchorage from a former nike surface to air 
missile site that same year oil was discovered in prudhoe bay on the arctic 
slope and in one nine six nine oil lease sales brought billions of dollars to 
the state statue in downtown anchorage of balto the lead sled dog during the 
last part of the iditarod serum run the decade of the one nine seven zero s was 
an important time of growth for the anchorage economy on march three one nine 
seven three the first one zero four nine mile long one six nine zero km 
iditarod trail sled dog race started from downtown anchorage with three four 
mushers twenty two mushers finished the race with the last one arriving in nome 
one month after he left the starting line in recent years winners have finished 
the race in less than one zero days in one nine seven four construction begain 
on the trans alaska pipeline system with valdez not anchorage as its southern 
terminus the oil discovery and pipline construction fueled a modern day boom 
when oil and construction companies set up their headquarters in anchorage the 
pipeline was completed in one nine seven seven at a cost of more than eight 
billion in one nine seven five bicentennial park was created in southeast 
anchorage on september one five one nine seven five the city and borough 
consolidated forming a unified government also included in this unification 
were eagle river eklutna girdwood glen alps and several other communities the 
unified area became officially known as the municipality of anchorage by one 
nine eight zero the population of anchorage had grown to one seven four four 
three one the decade of the one nine eight zero s was a time of growth thanks 
to a flood of north slope oil revenue into the state treasury capital projects 
and an aggressive beautification program combined with far sighted community 
planning greatly increased infrastructure and quality of life these included a 
new library civic center sports arena and performing arts center the one nine 
eight zero s was also a time when alaska s up and down economy struck the price 
of oil dropped dramatically and recession hit anchorage but in one nine eight 
four hilltop ski area was established which along with the alyeska resort in 
girdwood and alpenglow at arctic valley gave residents three fully operational 
skiing areas benefitting tourism and recreational activities in one nine eight 
six kincaid outdoor center opens in one nine eight nine mount redoubt erupted 
again curtailing aviation in the anchorage area for a short period of time the 
decade of the one nine nine zero s was a time when anchorage saw gold in one 
nine nine six the arctic winter games were held in chugiak eagle river and in 
one nine nine nine the alaska native heritage center opened on july eight two 
zero zero zero the municipal airport was renamed ted stevens anchorage 
international airport in honor of alaska s longest serving united states 
senator in spite of the height limitations on buildings anchorage today has an 
attractive skyline nevertheless particularly with the chugach mountains cook 
inlet or the often visible mount mckinley also known as denali as a backdrop 
from government hill one can see the best view of mount mckinley though space 
is limited in the anchorage bowl as locals call the peninsula on which the city 
is located many parks greenbelts and other undeveloped areas can be found 
within the city itself making it particularly attractive to nature lovers to 
say nothing of the attractions available just a short distance outside the city 
over the past thirty years however many of these undeveloped areas have filled 
in with houses strip malls and other development nonetheless there is an 
enormous amount of land under the anchorage municipal control which totals some 
one nine five five square miles five zero six three km one nine six one one mi 
four three nine five eight km one six nine seven two mi of it is land and six 
eight three four km two six three nine mi of it is water the total area is one 
three four six water anchorage is located in south central alaska at six one 
one three zero six north latitude about the same as stockholm and st petersburg 
one four nine five three five seven west longitude about the same as hawaii 
northeast of the alaska peninsula kodiak island and cook inlet due north of the 
kenai peninsula northwest of prince william sound and alaska panhandle and 
nearly due south of mount mckinley denali the city is situated on a triangular 
peninsula bordered on the east by the rugged scenic and eminently hike worthy 
chugach mountains on the northwest by the knik arm and on the southwest by the 
turnagain arm upper branches of the cook inlet which itself is the northernmost 
reach of the pacific ocean despite this the city lacks coastal beaches instead 
having wide treacherous mudflats adjacent to the north is matanuska susitna 
borough alaska to the south is kenai peninsula borough alaska and to the east 
is valdez cordova census area alaska climate average daytime summer 
temperatures are approximately five five to eight zero degrees fahrenheit one 
three to two seven degrees celsius average daytime winter temperatures are 
about five to two zero degrees one five to seven degrees celsius warmer than 
many places in the contiguous united states ted stevens anchorage international 
airport panc average january low and high temperatures are nine f two two f one 
three c five c with an average winter snowfall of seven zero six zero inches 
one seven nine three cm the weather on any given day and indeed for entire 
seasons can be very unpredictable some winters feature several feet of snow and 
bitterly cold temperatures while others just a foot or two of snow and frequent 
thaws which puts dangerous ice on the streets on march one seven two zero zero 
two a record two four hour st patrick s day snow storm dumped two five seven 
inches six five three cm of snow on the anchorage area causing the airport and 
schools to close on that day and several days longer for the schools the one 
nine five four one nine five five winter had one three two eight inches three 
three seven three cm which made it the snowiest winter on record the coldest 
temperature ever recorded at ted stevens anchorage international airport was 
three eight f three eight eight c on february three one nine four eight summers 
are typically very mild and pleasant though it can rain frequently there isn t 
any beach bathing in anchorage except at a few local lakes on the warmest 
summer days when those lakeside beaches can be extremely popular ted stevens 
anchorage international airport average july low and high temperatures are five 
two f six six f one one c one nine c and the hottest reading ever recorded was 
eight six f three zero c on june two five one nine five three the average 
annual precipitation at ted stevens anchorage international airport is one six 
zero seven inches four zero eight cm aside from the winter cold which most 
alaskans don t mind there are two primary nuisances associated with the seasons 
in the summer mosquitoes which are much worse out in the bush than in the city 
itself in the winter long nights and very short days since anchorage is at such 
a high latitude for months in mid winter residents go to work in the dark and 
return home in the dark those who don t study or work next to a window can go 
all week long without seeing the sun demographics as of the u s census of two 
zero zero zero anchorage had a population of two six zero two eight three and 
in all the municipality of anchorage is home to almost two fifths of alaska s 
population the population density is five nine two km one five three four mi 
there are one zero zero three six eight housing units at an average density of 
two two eight km five nine one mi the racial makeup of the municipality is 
seven two two three white caucasian five five five are asian americans five 
eight four are african americans seven two eight are american indians or alaska 
natives zero nine three are pacific islanders five six nine are hispanic 
americans or latinos of any race five nine eight are from two or more races and 
two one nine are from other non white backgrounds there are nine four eight two 
two households out of which three eight nine have children under the age one 
eight living with them five one one are married couples living together one one 
five have a female householder with no husband present and three two four are 
non families two three four of all households are made up of individuals and 
three eight have someone living alone who is six five years of age or older the 
average household size is two six seven and the average family size is three 
one nine in the city the population is spread out with two nine one under the 
age of one eight nine six from one eight to two four three three nine from two 
five to four four two one nine from four five to six four and five five who are 
six five years of age or older the median age is three two years for every one 
zero zero females there are one zero one six males for every one zero zero 
females age one eight and over there are one zero two four males the median 
income for a household in the city is five five five four six and the median 
income for a family is six three six eight two males have a median income of 
four one two six seven versus six three six eight two for females the per 
capita income for the city is two five two eight seven seven three of the 
population and five one of families are below the poverty line out of the total 
population eight eight of those under the age of one eight and six four of 
those six five and older are living below the poverty line anchoragites 
exemplify many of the qualities to be found among alaskans generally 
independence friendliness practical mindedness and a love of the outdoors there 
is even among businesspeople in anchorage a tendency to dress down there is no 
dress code in any anchorage restaurant this and a sort of frontier spirit that 
still lives on in alaska generally gives anchorage a relatively casual relaxed 
atmosphere compared to some other american cities these cultural 
characteristics are only more exaggerated the farther one moves out of the city 
into the rest of alaska the city has traditionally served as a destination for 
immigrants and there are active asian eastern european and hispanic populations 
along with communities of african americans and various groups of aboriginal 
alaskans over nine five languages are spoken by students in the anchorage 
school district government anchorage is administered by an elected mayor and 
assembly and a city manager the city s current mayor is mark begich sister 
cities anchorage is internationally partnered with a number of sister cities to 
promote global cooperation cultural exchange and economic collaboration today 
anchorage has six sister cities including chitose japan darwin australia 
incheon south korea magadan russia tromso norway and whitby england economy 
anchorage is the center of commerce for alaska and a major port receiving over 
nine five of all freight entering alaska passes as well as a major hub of the 
famous alaska railroad several oil and gas industries like bp exploration 
alaska inc conocophillips alaska inc doyon universal services enstar natural 
gas co exxonmobil production flint hills resources norcoast mechanical tesoro 
alaska petroleum co udelhoven oilfield system services inc union oil company of 
california and veco alaska inc are all headquartered in anchorage anchorage is 
home to two major corporations which provide communication services to alaska 
alaska communications systems and general communications inc both of which 
offer local and long distance telephone service dial up and broadband internet 
access and cellular telephone service many corporations such as large banks 
real estate transportation other communications and government agencies are all 
headquartered in anchorage there are two strategically important u s military 
bases bordering anchorage on the north elmendorf afb and fort richardson both 
military bases together station over nine zero zero zero military personnels 
numerous visitor and tourist facilities and services are available throughout 
the municipality of anchorage nearly all alaska interior bound tourists pass 
through anchorage at some stage of their journeys in alaska this is 
particulatly true since the alaska railroad has its southern terminus in 
anchorage not surprisingly the summer is tourist season and downtown anchorage 
as well as the highways and railroads leading north and south of the city are 
typically teeming with tourists anchorage has seasonal factors contribute to a 
fluctuating though low unemployment rate education education in anchorage eagle 
river chugiak eklutna girdwood fort richardson and elmendorf afb is managed by 
the anchorage school district anchorage has an excellent public school system 
that is ranked among the finest in the nation the anchorage school district is 
the eight one st largest district in the united states with nearly five zero 
zero zero zero students attending eight eight schools the district s average 
sat and act college entrance exam scores are consistently above the national 
average and advanced placement courses are offered at each of the district s 
high schools the international baccalaureate diploma programme is also offered 
at west high one of the local high schools the average teacher student ratio in 
the district s elementary schools is one teacher to approximately every two 
five students the district offers a comprehensive curriculum that emphasizes 
the basic communication skills of reading writing and arithmetic the standard 
program also includes social studies health science and physical education all 
students receive a quality education enriched with technology foreign language 
visual and performing arts and social sciences a variety of programs and 
alternative learning environments meet the needs of the diverse student 
population some examples include abc back to basics curriculum and montessori 
schools open optional programs foreign language immersion vocational technical 
training and charter schools comprehensive services for bilingual students and 
students with special needs are also available colleges and universities ninety 
percent of anchorage s adults have high school diplomas six five percent have 
attended one to three years of college and one seven percent hold advanced 
degrees placing anchorage among the top metropolitan cities in educational 
attainment anchorage boasts four excellent higher education facilities that 
offer quality higher education the university of alaska anchorage and alaska 
pacific university are within walking distance of each other and charter 
college and wayland baptist university are also located in city limits culture 
performing arts despite the relative remoteness of the location the city sports 
a lively arts community located next to town square municipal park in downtown 
anchorage the alaska center for the performing arts is a three part complex 
host to many performing arts events the facility can accommodate more than 
three zero zero zero patrons in two zero zero zero nearly two four five zero 
zero zero people visited six seven eight public performances it is home to 
eight resident performing arts companies and has featured mega musicals such as 
cats grease les miserables phantom of the opera and big river the center hosts 
the anchorage symphony orchestra which is a semi professional symphony 
orchestra the center also hosts the world famous international ice carving 
competition as part of the fur rendezvous festival in february there are also 
weekly sessions of irish traditional music jazz and other musical scenes the 
anchorage concert association brings one five to two zero world class 
performing arts events to the community each winter and numerous independent 
perforance groups museums and art collections the alaska aviation heritage 
museum is a museum with artifacts reflecting alaska s unique aviation history 
the alaska state troopers museum was formed in the late one nine six zero s and 
shares the history of the alaska state troopers the anchorage fire department 
museum is a museum that relive anchorage history among the displays of fire 
fighting memorabilia including a vintage one nine two one lafrance fire truck 
the imaginarium is a hands on science discovery center the oscar anderson house 
museum is anchorage s only house museum established in one nine one five the 
russian orthodox museum is a museum that represents history of the russian 
orthodox church in alaska the wolf song of alaska was incorporated in one nine 
eight eight is a world class observation facility the alaska museum of natural 
history is a non profit museum that educates exclusively on alaska s unique 
geological cultural and ecological history history art collections are at the 
anchorage museum of history and art opened in one nine six eight is a world 
class museum the heritage library museum was established in one nine six eight 
and is viewed as one of the largest collections of alaska artifacts other 
cultural institutions the alaska zoo opened as a children s zoo in one nine six 
nine is home to just under one zero zero birds and mammals the alaska wildlife 
conservation center opened to the public in one nine nine three is a refuge for 
the orphaned injured wildlife a non profit organization the alaska native 
heritage center opened in one nine nine nine is a gathering place that 
celebrates perpetuates and shares alaska native cultures the alaska botanical 
garden contains over nine zero zero species of hardy perennials and one five 
zero native plant species local attractions the h two oasis indoor waterpark 
opened in two zero zero three is literally and figuratively the hottest spot in 
alaska for fun and adventure alpenglow at arctic valley is a ski resort that is 
located on ski bowl road in the chugach state park near fort richardson the 
alyeska resort is a ski resort that is located in girdwood the hilltop ski area 
is located on the gentle slopes of southeast anchorage that weave against the 
base of chugach state park the nordic skiing association of anchorage is a non 
profit organization dedicated to promoting all forms of nordic skiing media 
anchorage s leading newspapers are the anchorage daily news the alaska star the 
insurgent four nine the anchorage press and the petroleum news anchorage is 
also well served by television and radio anchorage s major network television 
affiliates are kimo one three abc ktva one one cbs kakm seven pbs ktby four fox 
ktuu tv two nbc kyes five upn and kdmd three three pax shopping arcs the alaska 
rural communications service which provides some original programming and also 
cherry picks retransmissions from among the broadcast stations in anchorage 
though usually not kimo except in very rare occasions such as iditarod coverage 
to provide television service to remote areas leading radio stations include am 
stations ktzn five five zero clear channel communications khar five nine zero 
keni six five zero clear channel communications kbyr seven zero zero kfqd seven 
five zero and kudo one zero eight zero fm stations krua eight eight one 
university of alaska anchorage kakl eight eight five positive encouraging k 
love christian music k love emf broadcasting katb eight nine three knba nine 
zero three kska nine one one kfat nine two nine new northwest broadcasters kafc 
nine three seven keag nine seven three klef nine eight one kymg nine eight nine 
clear channel communications kbfx one zero zero five clear channel 
communications kgot one zero one three clear channel communications kdbz one 
zero two one new northwest broadcasters kmxs one zero three one kbrj one zero 
four one knik one zero five seven kwhl one zero six five and kash one zero 
seven five clear channel communications sports anchorage is home to the alaska 
aces of the echl hockey league the anchorage bucs baseball club is a summer 
collegiate baseball team attracting players from universities throughout the 
world the anchorage glacier pilots is a member of the national baseball 
congress anchorage is also home to the great alaska shootout an annual college 
basketball tournament that features colleges from all over the u s the best ski 
jumper from the u s in the past one five years is from anchorage alan alborn he 
has finished four th in a stage of the world cup in engelberg switzerland and 
has a one one th place from the two zero zero two olympics in salt lake city 
utah he also holds the us skiflying record with two two one five meters from 
two zero zero two in planica slovenia infrastructure transportation anchorage 
is usually the starting or ending point of most visitors alaska vacations and 
it serves as the airline hub for the state being serviced by ted stevens 
anchorage international airport anchorage is served by some national airlines 
primarily seattle based alaska airlines as well as a number of international 
airlines the alaska railroad offers daily summer service to seward talkeetna 
denali national park and fairbanks these communities are also served by inter 
city bus line from anchorage transportation to downtown anchorage is convenient 
by taxicab airport shuttle or hotel courtesy shuttles upon arrival visitors can 
stop by the anchorage convention multiple beautiful cross country ski trails 
america s highest percentage of licensed airplane pilots with several airports 
and landing strips in the city or nearby a very low population density for a 
city its size frequent small earthquakes spring windstorms chinook winds active 
volcanoes nearby to the southwest in the alaska range volcanoes such as mount 
spurr augustine volcano mount redoubt and others have coated the city with ash 
in recent years its extreme youth it was founded in one nine one five but didn 
t grow much until the one nine four zero s and much else despite this or 
perhaps because of it anchorage is definitely an american city replete with a 
vibrant business climate large shopping malls traffic congestion one can t 
easily move about by foot and public transportation in the middle of winter 
suburban style subdivisions and two suburbs eagle river and chugiak unless one 
counts the massive numbers of commuters who drive from as far away as the 
matanuska valley communities of wasilla and palmer anchorage has been named an 
all america city in the years one nine five six one nine six five one nine 
eight four eight five and most recently in two zero zero two the city won its 
latest award based on civic activities like the two zero zero one special 
olympics winter games the anchorage youth court and bridge builders see also 
south central alaska neighborhoods of anchorage alaska port of anchorage 
references anchorage alaska fact sheet united states census bureau url accessed 
on december three zero two zero zero five anchorage climate records list 
national weather service url accessed on december three zero two zero zero five 
the weather channel one nine nine five two zero zero five monthly climatolgy 
graph url retrieved on december three zero two zero zero five municipality of 
anchorage traffic department long range transportation plan url accessed on 
january one eight two zero zero six anchorage historical highlights url 
accessed on january two one two zero zero six the great alaska earthquake of 
one nine six four url accessed on january two one two zero zero six external 
links municipality of anchorage official site anchorage convention and visitors 
bureau alaska visitors center alaska com information anchorage municipal 
libraries anchorage all america city two zero zero two information photographic 
virtual tour of anchorage anchorage cam includes camera links national weather 
service anchorage office all america city anchorage alaska cities in alaska 
coastal cities independent cities in the united states an argument is a 
collected series of statements to establish a definite proposition and may 
refer to logical argument a demonstration of a proof or using logical reasoning 
for persuasion oral argument a verbal presentation to a judge by a lawyer verb 
argument a phrase in a sentence that qualifies a verb heuristic argument a 
proof or demonstration relying on experimental results or one which is not 
fully rigorous ontological argument a proof by intuition or reason of the 
existence of god political argument the use of logic rather than propaganda in 
promoting political ideas doublespeak argument the use of misleading or 
irrelevant reasoning by one side during a debate javelin argument a 
cosmological reasoning about the infinite size of the universe the argument an 
album by the band fugazi released in two zero zero one argument literature the 
brief summary at the beginning of a section of a poem grand argument story a 
type of story that is intended to be conceptually complete in mathematics 
argument may also mean independent variable or input of a function the argument 
of f x is x complex argument the angular component of a complex number 
represented in polar coordinates argument principle a theorem in complex 
analysis about meromorphic functions inside and on a closed contour diagonal 
argument a type of proof over an infinite domain used to identify the cardinal 
class of the real numbers probabilistic argument any proof using probability 
theory in computer science argument may also mean argument computer science an 
input to a subprogram or subroutine see also philosophical arguments argument 
form a method of logically analyzing sentences argumentation theory the science 
and theory of civil debates argumentative a type of evidentiary objection to a 
question for a witness during a trial default argument an actual parameter to a 
program that is used when no other actual parameter is provided existence of 
god contains lists of common ontological arguments for and arguments against 
the existence of god toulmin model the model of an argument distinction without 
a difference apollo one one was an american space mission part of the apollo 
program and the first manned mission to land on the moon it launched on july 
one six one nine six nine on july two zero mission commander neil armstrong and 
pilot edwin buzz aldrin became the first humans to set foot on the moon crew 
neil armstrong flew in gemini eight running long eagle was four seconds further 
along its descent trajectory than planned and would land miles west of the 
intended site the lm navigation and guidance computer reported several unusual 
program alarms as it guided the lm s descent these alarms tore the crew s 
attention away from the scene outside as the descent proceeded in nasa s 
mission control center in houston texas a young controller named steve bales 
told the flight director that it was safe to continue the descent in spite of 
the alarms once they returned their attention to the view outside the 
astronauts saw that their computer was guiding them toward a landing site full 
of large rocks scattered around a large crater armstrong took manual control of 
the lunar module at that point and guided it to a landing at two zero one seven 
utc on july two zero with about three zero seconds worth of fuel left the 
saturn v carrying apollo one one took several seconds to clear the tower on 
july one six one nine six nine the program alarms were executive overflows 
indicating that the computer could not finish its work in the time allotted the 
cause was later determined to be the lm rendezvous radar being left on during 
the descent causing the computer to spend unplanned time servicing the unused 
radar steve bales received a medal of freedom for his go call under pressure 
although apollo one one landed with less fuel than other missions they also 
encountered a premature low fuel warning it was later found caused by the lunar 
gravity permitting greater propellant slosh uncovering a fuel sensor extra 
baffles in the tanks were subsequently added at two five six utc on july two 
one six and a half hours after landing armstrong made his descent to the moon 
surface and took his famous one giant leap for mankind aldrin joined him and 
the two spent two and a half hours drilling core samples photographing what 
they saw and collecting rocks they planned placement of the early apollo 
scientific experiment package easep and the u s flag by studying their landing 
site through eagle s twin triangular windows which gave them a six zero field 
of view preparation required longer than the two hours scheduled armstrong had 
some initial difficulties squeezing through the hatch with his plss according 
to veteran moonwalker john young a redesign of the lm to incorporate a smaller 
hatch was not followed by a redesign of the plss backpack so some of the 
highest heart rates recorded from apollo astronauts occurred during lm egress 
and ingress buzz aldrin poses on the moon allowing neil armstrong to photograph 
both of them using the visor s reflection the remote control unit controls on 
armstrong s chest prevented him from seeing his feet while climbing down the 
nine rung ladder armstrong pulled a d ring to deploy the modular equipment 
stowage assembly mesa folded against eagle s side and activate the tv camera 
the first images used a slow scan television system and were picked up at 
goldstone in the usa but with better fidelity by honeysuckle creek in australia 
minutes later the tv was switched to normal television and the feed was 
switched to the more sensitive radio telescope station at the parkes 
observatory in australia despite some technical and weather difficulties 
ghostly black and white images of the first lunar eva were received and were 
immediately broadcast to at least six zero zero million people on earth after 
describing the surface very fine grained almost like a powder armstrong stepped 
off eagle s footpad and into history as the first human to set foot on another 
world he reported that moving in the moon s gravity one sixth of earth s was 
perhaps even easier than the simulations in addition to fulfilling president 
john f kennedy s mandate to land a man on the moon before the end of the one 
nine six zero s apollo one one was an engineering test of the apollo system 
therefore armstrong snapped photos of the lm so engineers would be able to 
judge its post landing condition he then collected a contingency soil sample 
using a sample bag on a stick he folded the bag and tucked it into a pocket on 
his right thigh he removed the tv camera from the mesa made a panoramic sweep 
and mounted it on a tripod one two m four zero ft from the lm the tv camera 
cable remained partly coiled and presented a tripping hazard throughout the eva 
photo of the actual plaque left on the moon attached to the ladder of the lm 
descent stage aldrin joined him on the surface and tested methods for moving 
around including two footed kangaroo hops the plss backpack created a tendency 
to tip backwards but neither astronaut had serious problems maintaining balance 
loping became the preferred method of movement the astronauts reported that 
they needed to plan their movements six or seven steps ahead the fine soil was 
quite slippery aldrin remarked that moving from sunlight into eagle s shadow 
produced no temperature change inside the suit though the helmet was warmer in 
sunlight so he felt cooler in shadow a visible shockwave formed as the saturn v 
encountered maximum dynamic pressure max q at about one minute two zero seconds 
into the flight altitude one two five km four km downrange velocity four four 
zero m s together the astronauts planted the u s flag then took a phone call 
from president richard nixon the mesa failed to provide a stable work platform 
and was in shadow slowing work somewhat as they worked the moonwalkers kicked 
up gray dust which soiled the outer part of their suits the integrated thermal 
meteoroid garment they deployed the easep which included a passive seismograph 
and a laser ranging retroreflector then armstrong loped about one two zero m 
four zero zero ft from the lm to snap photos at the rim of east crater while 
aldrin collected two core tubes he used the geological hammer to pound in the 
tubes the only time the hammer was used on apollo one one the astronauts then 
collected rock samples using scoops and tongs on extension handles many of the 
surface activities took longer than expected so they had to stop documented 
sample collection halfway through the allotted three four min neil armstrong 
works at the lm in one of the few photos taken of him from the lunar surface 
nasa photo as one one four zero five eight eight six during this period mission 
control used a coded phrase to warn armstrong that his metabolic rates were 
high and that he should slow down he was moving rapidly from task to task as 
time ran out rates remained generally lower than expected for both astronauts 
throughout the walk however so mission control granted the astronauts a one 
five minute extension lunar ascent and return aldrin entered eagle first with 
some difficulty the astronauts lifted film and two sample boxes containing more 
than two two kg four eight lb of lunar surface material to the lm hatch using a 
flat cable pulley device called the lunar equipment conveyor armstrong then 
jumped to the ladder s third rung and climbed into the lm after transferring to 
lm life support the explorers lightened the ascent stage for return to lunar 
orbit by tossing out their plss backpacks lunar overshoes one hasselblad camera 
and other equipment then they lifted off in eagle s ascent stage to rejoin cmp 
michael collins aboard columbia in lunar orbit eagle was jettisoned and left in 
lunar orbit later nasa reports mentioned that eagle s orbit had decayed 
resulting in it impacting in an uncertain location on the lunar surface after 
more than two hours on the lunar surface they returned to collins on board 
columbia bringing two zero eight seven kilograms of lunar samples with them the 
two moon walkers had left behind scientific instruments such as a 
retroreflector array used for the lunar laser ranging experiment they also left 
an american flag and other mementos including a plaque mounted on the lm 
descent stage ladder bearing two drawings of earth of the western and eastern 
hemispheres an inscription and signatures of the astronauts and richard nixon 
the inscription read here men from planet earthfirst set foot upon the moonjuly 
one nine six nine a d we came in peace for all mankind the astronauts returned 
to earth on july two four welcomed as heroes the splashdown point was two six 
six zero km one four four zero nm east of wake island or three eight zero km 
two one zero nm south of johnston atoll and two four km one five mi from the 
recovery ship uss hornet the command module is displayed at the national air 
and space museum washington d c the crew of apollo one one in quarantine after 
returing to earth visited by richard nixon contingency television address the 
national archives in washington d c has a copy of the following contingency 
memo titled in event of moon disaster and dated july one eight one nine six 
nine which was prepared by william safire for president nixon to read on 
television in the event the apollo one one astronauts were stranded on the moon 
fate has ordained that the men who went to the moon to explore in peace will 
stay on the moon to rest in peace these brave men neil armstrong and edwin 
aldrin know that there is no hope for their recovery but they also know that 
there is hope for mankind in their sacrifice these two men are laying down 
their lives in mankind s most noble goal the search for truth and understanding 
they will be mourned by their families and friends they will be mourned by 
their nation they will be mourned by the people of the world they will be 
mourned by a mother earth that dared send two of her sons into the unknown in 
their exploration they stirred the people of the world to feel as one in their 
sacrifice they bind more tightly the brotherhood of man in ancient days men 
looked at stars and saw their heroes in the constellations in modern times we 
do much the same but our heroes are epic men of flesh and blood others will 
follow and surely find their way home man s search will not be denied but these 
men were the first and they will remain the foremost in our hearts armstrong on 
lunar surface with gold visor raised from one six mm film nasa for every human 
being who looks up at the moon in the nights to come will know that there is 
some corner of another world that is forever mankind the last line of the 
statement is reminiscent of a rupert brooke poem called the soldier the poem 
starts if i should die think only this of me that there s some corner of a 
foreign fieldthat is forever england following this address radio 
communications with the moon would have been cut off the astronauts left alone 
to die while a clergyman was to commend their souls to the deepest of the deep 
in the fashion of a burial at sea gallery image apollo one one png aldrin 
stands next to the passive seismic experiment package with the lunar module in 
the background image aldrin near module leg jpg aldrin inspects the lm landing 
gear image apollo one one one zero zero zero jpg aldrin unpacks experiments 
from the lm image buzz aldrin with u s flag jpg aldrin with the u s flag image 
two three a one one east jpg panoramic assembly of east crater communications 
link early in the planning of the project apollo nasa decided to combine all 
communications between spacecraft and earth into a single multiplexed feed 
called the unified s band system including audio communications television 
images crew medical telemetry and the spacecraft systems telemetry the signal 
was picked up by three purpose built stations goldstone california honeysuckle 
creek australia and fresnedillas spain and backed up by deep space network 
stations known as wing stations in australia spain and the united states at 
first the signal was routed to greenbelt maryland by way of submarine telephone 
cables using twelve voice circuits the signal was divided into twelve parts 
using inverse multiplexing sent onto the circuits and reintegrated in maryland 
before being sent on to nasa in houston intelsat satellites began taking over 
the trans oceanic transmissions toward the end of the one nine six zero s and 
nasa ended its contracts for the submarine telephone circuits which were then 
reallocated by telephone administrations for normal voice use on one four july 
one nine six nine the intelsat satellite over the atlantic failed a replacement 
was launched on one six july but went into a useless orbit and would not be 
reoriented in time to be used the early bird satellite was activated but 
thought it might not have enough power to get a signal to the united states the 
australia station was vital to picking up the signal during the moonwalks or 
keeping the astronauts waiting on the moon eight hours before venturing out a 
communications team was dispatched to spain to begin setting up the telephone 
circuits for nasa s inverse multiplexed signal european telecommunications 
administrators mostly government post offices were not accustomed to doing the 
business required they would normally require telegram messages to be exchanged 
with top level administrative approval but the twelve circuits had to be 
recovered from six countries to be made available to nasa which had set a time 
limit two hours before launch or the launch would be canceled it would be the 
last ideal launch window before one nine seven zero other launch windows had 
been missed due to spacecraft equipment problems an official with the spanish 
communications authority helped the team secure the circuits with his own 
personal list of contacts the last circuit using inverse multiplexing was 
accepted by nasa just minutes before the time limit three days later the 
transmissions from the moon were picked up in spain relayed to the united 
states over the undersea circuits and made available by nasa to the americas 
they were beamed across the pacific ocean and from the far east were carried on 
the indian ocean satellite the postal telephone authority in west germany 
turned a large radio dish to aim at the indian ocean satellite picking up the 
signal from australia and providing it to western europe therefore viewers in 
western europe saw neil armstrong set foot on the moon a full half second later 
than those in the united states and some one eight seconds after it actually 
happened had this vital communications link not been restored the pledge of 
president john f kennedy to land a man on the moon by the end of the decade 
would have been missed mission trivia and urban legends trivia some internal 
nasa planning documents referred to the callsigns of the csm and lm as snowcone 
and haystack these were quietly changed before being announced to the press 
shortly after landing before preparations have begun for the eva aldrin 
broadcast that this is the lm pilot i d like to take this opportunity to ask 
every person listening in whoever and wherever they may be to pause for a 
moment and contemplate the events of the past few hours and to give thanks in 
his or her own way he then took holy communion privately at this time nasa was 
still fighting a lawsuit brought by madalyn murray o hair who had objected to 
the apollo eight crew reading from the book of genesis which demanded that 
their astronauts refrain from religious activities while in space as such 
aldrin an episcopalian chose to refrain from directly mentioning this he had 
kept the plan quiet not even mentioning it to his wife and did not reveal it 
publicly for several years several books indicate that early mission timelines 
had buzz aldrin not neil armstrong as the first man on the moon a replica of 
the footprint left by neil armstrong is located in tranquility park in houston 
texas the park was dedicated in one nine seven nine a decade after the first 
moon landing the australian movie the dish two zero zero zero tells the 
slightly fictionalised story of how the images of the moon walk were received 
by the radio telescope at parkes observatory new south wales according to the 
hbo mini series from the earth to the moon michael collins made the following 
suggestion as to what armstrong should say upon stepping onto the lunar surface 
if you had any balls you d say oh my god what is that thing then scream and cut 
your mic armstrong claims to have said that s one small step for a man one 
giant leap for mankind although the a is not at all clear in recordings made at 
ground control it has been pointed out that the audio and video links were 
somewhat intermittent partly due to storms near parkes observatory recently 
digital analysis of the tape by nasa revealed the a may have been spoken but 
obscured by static folklore at some point while on the moon armstrong 
supposedly said good luck mr gorski some years later gorski died so he felt he 
could now explain this remark as a boy he heard a couple next door arguing and 
the wife said oral sex is it oral sex you want you ll get oral sex when the kid 
next door walks on the moon mr gorski this story is untrue neil armstrong 
apparently took a tartan where no tartan had been worn before a tiny swatch of 
the clan armstrong plaid was affixed to his suit when he walked on the moon 
another item that armstrong took with him was a special diamond studded 
astronaut pin which was given to deke slayton by the widows of the apollo one 
crew the pin had been intended to be flown in apollo one then given to deke 
after the mission but due to the disaster the widows ended up giving the pin to 
him after the funerals deke gave the pin to neil to leave at tranquility base 
two main conspiracy theories surround the mission firstly that the landing was 
a hoax this is generally discounted although it has slowly grown in popularity 
particularly since the release of the movie capricorn one one nine seven eight 
which portrays a nasa attempt to fake a landing on mars secondly a less well 
known urban legend suggests that they were being watched while on the moon and 
had seen alien vehicles there this grew in popularity after the book someone 
else is on our moon was published according to another legend a survey 
undertaken in the one nine eight zero s in morocco revealed that a substantial 
percentage didn t think man had landed on the moon this was not due to 
conspiracy theory but rather to that segment not having been informed see also 
extra vehicular activity list of spacewalks splashdown list of artificial 
objects on the moon google moon external links nasa apollo lunar surface 
journal apollo one one entry in encyclopedia astronautica usgs apollo mission 
traverse maps description of the lunar module computer record of lunar events 
first moon landing in one nine six nine marked an entire generation apollo 
simulation for orbiter spaceflight sim references discussing mis quote lunar 
landing sites in honor of the first manned moon landing apollo program human 
spaceflights lunar spacecraft one nine six nine apollo eight was the second 
manned mission of the apollo space program in which commander frank borman 
command module pilot james lovell and lunar module pilot william anders became 
the first humans to leave earth orbit and to orbit around the moon it was also 
the first manned launch of the saturn v rocket nasa prepared for the mission in 
only four months the hardware involved had only been used a few times the 
saturn v had launched only twice before and the apollo spacecraft had only just 
finished its first manned mission apollo seven however the success of the 
mission paved the way for the successful completion of john f kennedy s goal of 
landing on the moon before the end of the decade after launching on december 
two one one nine six eight the crew took three days to travel to the moon which 
they orbited for two zero hours while in lunar orbit they made a christmas eve 
television broadcast this was one of the most watched broadcasts of all time 
planning on december two two one nine six six nasa announced the crew for the 
third manned apollo flight frank borman michael collins and bill anders collins 
was replaced by his backup jim lovell in july one nine six eight after collins 
had to have surgery as he was suffering cervical intervertebral disc herniation 
an intervertebral disc had slipped into the spinal cavity and required two 
vertebrae to be fused together collins recovered and went on to be the command 
module pilot for apollo one one in september one nine six seven the manned 
spacecraft center in houston texas proposed a series of missions that would 
lead up to a manned lunar landing seven mission types were outlined each 
testing a specific set of components and tasks each previous step needed to be 
completed successfully before the next mission type could be undertaken these 
were a unmanned command service module csm test b unmanned lunar module lm test 
c manned csm in low earth orbit d manned csm and lm in low earth orbit e manned 
csm and lm in an elliptical earth orbit with an apogee of four six zero zero mi 
seven four zero zero km f manned csm and lm in lunar orbit g manned lunar 
landing of all the components of the apollo system the lunar module lm which 
would eventually be used to land on the moon presented the most problems it was 
behind schedule and when the first model was shipped to cape canaveral in june 
one nine six eight over one zero one separate defects were discovered grumman 
aircraft engineering corporation which was the lead contractor for the lm 
predicted that the first mannable lm to be used for the d mission would not be 
ready until at least february one nine six nine delaying the entire sequence 
apollo csm diagram nasa george low the manager of the apollo spacecraft program 
office proposed a solution in august since the command service module csm would 
be ready three months before the lunar module they could fly a csm only mission 
in december one nine six eight but instead of just repeating the flight of 
apollo seven the c mission that would fly the csm in earth orbit they could 
send the csm all the way to the moon and maybe even enter into orbit this 
mission was dubbed the c prime mission this new mission would allow nasa to 
test procedures that would be used on the manned lunar landings that would 
otherwise have to wait until apollo one zero the f mission there were also 
concerns from the cia that the soviets were planning their own circumlunar 
flight for december to upstage the americans once again see zond program the 
first stage of as five zero three being erected in the vab on february one one 
nine six eight almost every senior manager at nasa agreed with this new mission 
the only person who needed some convincing was james e webb the nasa 
administrator however outvoted by the rest of the agency he gave his approval 
after leading the agency for eight years he would resign just four days before 
the launch of apollo seven the first manned apollo flight deke slayton the 
director of flight crew operations decided to swap the crews of the d and e 
missions james mcdivitt the original commander of the d mission has said he was 
never offered the circumlunar flight but would probably have turned it down as 
he wanted to fly the lunar module borman on the other hand jumped at the chance 
his original mission would just have been a repeat of the previous flight 
except in a higher orbit this swap also meant a swap of spacecraft borman s 
crew would now use csm one zero three while mcdivitt s crew would use csm one 
zero four in the end the e mission was canceled as most its objectives had been 
covered by the apollo eight and apollo nine flights mission managers were also 
confident that apollo one zero would also cover the remaining objectives with 
its lunar orbit flight on september nine the crew entered the simulators to 
begin their preparation for the flight by the time the mission flew the crew 
would have spent seven hours training for every actual hour of flight although 
all crew members were trained for all aspects of the mission it was necessary 
to specialize borman as commander was given training on controlling the 
spacecraft during the re entry lovell was trained on navigating the spacecraft 
in case communication was lost with the earth anders was placed in charge of 
checking the spacecraft was in working order it was not until november one two 
that a public announcement was made about the change of mission for apollo 
eight previous to this thomas o paine the deputy administrator of nasa had made 
a fleeting remark that all options were being considered borman s main concern 
during the four months leading up to the launch was keeping the flight plan as 
simple as possible not accepting any addition that went beyond the simple 
objectives of performing the first manned saturn v launch going to the moon and 
orbiting it he made sure that they stayed in lunar orbit only as long as 
necessary one zero orbits the crew now living in the crew quarters at kennedy 
space center received a visit from charles lindbergh the night before the 
launch they talked about how before his flight lindbergh had used a piece of 
string to measure the distance from new york to paris on a globe and from that 
calculated the fuel needed for the flight the total was a tenth of the amount 
that the saturn v would burn every second the saturn v the apollo eight saturn 
v being rolled out to pad three nine a the saturn v rocket used by apollo eight 
was designated sa five zero three the third flight model when it was erected in 
the vertical assembly building on two zero december one nine six seven it was 
thought that the rocket would be used for an unmanned test flight carrying a 
boilerplate command service module although apollo six had suffered several 
major problems it suffered severe pogo oscillation during its first stage and 
two second stage engines shutdown early marshall space flight center in charge 
of the saturn v was confident that it could solve all the issues without the 
need for another unmanned test flight the sa five zero three mission was thus 
changed to a manned one however nasa managers did impose some restrictions on a 
manned flight taking place the s ii second stage had to undergo cryogenic 
testing at the mississippi test facility and other changes were to be made to 
man rate the vehicle so on april three zero the saturn v was unstacked and the 
s ii second stage shipped by barge to the test site the spark igniters on the 
second and third stage engines were also modified in may one nine six eight a 
leak was found in a first stage engine requiring it to be replaced with only 
two launches of the saturn v under its belt the ground crew at kennedy space 
center ksc was having problems keeping to the schedule the grumman crew was 
also having issues with the lunar module concern was expressed at the fact so 
much work had to be done on the lunar module after it had shipped to the cape 
the ascent engine developed leaks that caused redesigns and valve changes then 
in august one nine six eight the entire mission changed sa five zero three 
would launch men to the moon and would not be carrying a lunar module instead 
carrying a mass equivalent called a lunar module test article lta similar to 
ones used for apollo four and apollo six in order to speed up the pre launch 
preparations much of the modification of the saturn v was taken out of the 
hands of ksc and given to appropriate development centers only changes that 
affected crew safety were made the apollo eight spacecraft was placed on top of 
the rocket on september two one and the rocket made the slow three mile five km 
journey to the launch pad on nine october testing continued all through 
december until the day before launch the sa five zero three designation stood 
for saturn apollo and was used by nasa departments concerned with the launch 
vehicle however departments concerned with the manned flight often used as five 
zero three standing for apollo saturn both of these designations were used at 
the time to refer to the mission as a whole the five zero three number 
indicated that it was flight number three five zero three of the saturn v five 
zero three the mission launch and trans lunar injection apollo eight launch the 
photo is a double exposure as the moon was not visible at the time of launch 
nasa apollo eight launched at seven five one zero zero a m eastern standard 
time on december two one one nine six eight the entire launch phase was 
practically flawless with only minor problems the s ic first stage s engines 
underperformed by zero seven five causing the engines to burn for two four five 
seconds longer than planned towards the end of the second stage burn the rocket 
underwent pogo oscillations that frank borman estimated were of the order of 
one two hz and about zero two five g two five m s the first manned saturn v 
placed the spacecraft into a one one two eight mi by one one eight nine mi one 
eight one five km by one nine one three km earth orbit with a period of eight 
eight minutes and one zero seconds the apogee was also slightly higher than 
intended with a planned circular orbit of one one five mi one eight five km the 
s ic impacted the atlantic ocean at and the s ii at for the next two hours and 
three eight minutes the crew and mission control worked to check that the 
spacecraft was in working in order and ready for trans lunar injection tli the 
burn that would put the spacecraft on a trajectory to the moon at the same time 
the crew transformed the capsule from a rocket payload to a spacecraft and the 
s ivb third stage had to be in working order on the previous unmanned test the 
s ivb had failed to re ignite during the flight there would be three capsule 
communicators usually referred to as capcoms on a rotating roster these were 
the only people who would normally communicate with the crew michael collins 
was the first of these on duty and at two hours two seven minutes and two two 
seconds after launch radioed apollo eight you are go for tli mission control 
had given official permission for the crew to go to the moon over the next 
twelve minutes before the burn the crew continued to monitor the spacecraft and 
the rocket the s ivb third stage rocket ignited on time and burned perfectly 
for five minutes and one seven seconds the burn increased the velocity of the 
spacecraft to three five five zero five ft s one zero eight two two m s and 
their altitude at the end of the burn was two one five four mi three four six 
seven km they were the fastest humans in history now that the s ivb had 
performed its required tasks it was jettisoned the crew then rotated the 
spacecraft to take some photographs of the spent stage as well as practiced 
flying in formation with it as the crew rotated the spacecraft around they had 
their first views of the earth as they moved away from it this was the first 
time humans had been able to see the entire earth in one go borman became 
worried that the s ivb was staying too close to the csm and suggested to 
mission control that the crew perform a separation maneuver mission control at 
first suggested pointing the spacecraft towards earth and using the reaction 
control system rcs thrusters on the service module to add three ft s zero nine 
m s away from the earth but borman did not want to lose sight of the s ivb 
after much discussion it was decided to burn in this direction anyway but at 
nine ft s two seven m s these discussions ended up putting the crew an hour 
behind their flight plan five hours after launch mission control commanded the 
s ivb booster to vent its remaining fuel through its engine bell to change its 
trajectory such that it would flyby the moon and enter into a solar orbit so as 
to pose no future hazard to the crew it went into a zero nine nine by zero nine 
two au solar orbit with an inclination of two three four seven and a period of 
three four zero eight zero days the members of the apollo eight crew were the 
first humans to pass through the van allen radiation belts which extend up to 
one five zero zero zero mi two five zero zero zero km from earth although it 
was predicted that the passage through the belts would cause a radiation dosage 
of no more than a chest x ray or one milligray during the course of a year the 
average human receives a dose of two to three mgy there was still interest in 
the radiation dosages on the crew so each crewmember wore a personal radiation 
dosimeter that could be read back to the ground as well as three passive film 
dosimeters that show the cumulative radiation experienced by the crew by the 
end of the mission the average radiation dose of the crew was one six mgy 
coasting to the moon one of the first images taken by humans of the whole earth 
probably photographed by bill anders south is up with south america in the 
middle jim lovell s main job as command module pilot was to act as navigator 
although mission control performed all the actual navigation calculation it was 
necessary that in case of communication loss the crew could navigate their way 
home this was done by star sightings using a sextant built into the spacecraft 
measuring the angle between a star and the earth s or the moon s horizon this 
proved to be difficult as the venting by the s ivb had caused a large cloud of 
debris to form around the spacecraft making it hard to distinguish what were 
the actual stars by seven hours into the mission the delay in moving away from 
the s ivb and lovell s star sightings meant that they were behind schedule on 
the flight plan by about one hour and four zero minutes the crew now placed the 
spacecraft into passive thermal control ptc or what is more aptly called 
barbecue mode this had the spacecraft roll about one rotation per hour along 
its long axis in order to ensure even heat distribution of the spacecraft in 
direct sunlight the spacecraft could be heated to over two zero zero c while 
the parts in shadow would be one zero zero c these temperatures could cause the 
heat shield to crack or propellant lines to burst as it was impossible to get a 
perfect roll the spacecraft actually swept out a cone as it rotated this would 
have to be trimmed every half hour as it started to get larger and larger the 
first mid course correction came one one hours into the flight testing on the 
ground had shown there was a small chance that the service propulsion system 
sps engine would explode when burned for long periods unless its combustion 
chamber was coated first this could be done by burning the engine for a short 
period this first correction burn was only two four seconds and added about two 
zero four ft s six two m s prograde in the direction of travel this was less 
than the two four eight ft s seven five m s planned and the shortfall was due 
to a bubble of helium in the oxidizer lines causing lower than expected fuel 
pressure requiring the crew to use the small reaction control system rcs 
thrusters to make up the shortfall two later planned midcourse corrections were 
cancelled as the trajectory was found to be perfect eleven hours into the 
flight the crew had been awake for over one six hours having been awakened 
about five hours before launch so it was time for frank borman to start his 
scheduled seven hour sleep period it proved difficult to sleep nasa had decided 
that at least one crewmember should be awake at all times to deal with any 
issues that might arise but the constant radio chatter with the ground and the 
air circulation fans made it hard to sleep as well as this sleeping in space is 
a somewhat unnatural experience you cannot rest your head on a pillow and bill 
anders said that he would suddenly jolt awake with the sensation that he was 
falling apollo eight s ivb rocket stage nasa about an hour after starting his 
sleep period borman requested clearance to take a seconal sleeping pill but the 
pill had little effect after borman slept for seven hours fitfully he awoke 
feeling ill he vomited twice and had a bout of diarrhea that left the 
spacecraft full of small globules of vomit and feces the crew cleaned up as 
best as they could borman decided that he did not want the world to know about 
his medical problems but lovell and anders still wanted to tell the ground they 
decided to use the data storage equipment dse which could be used by the crew 
to tape voice recordings and telemetry which were then dumped to the ground at 
high speed after recording a description of borman s illness they requested 
that mission control check the recording as the crew would like an evaluation 
of the voice comments a conference between the crew and medical personnel was 
held using the unoccupied second floor control room there were two identical 
control rooms in houston on the second and third floor of which only one is 
used during the course of a mission during a private communication with the 
crew it was decided that there was little to worry about and that it was either 
a two four hour flu as borman thought or just a reaction to the sleeping pill 
in fact it is now thought that he was suffering from space adaptation syndrome 
which affects about a third of astronauts during their first day in space as 
their vestibular system adapts to weightlessness it had never arisen on 
previous spacecraft mercury and gemini as they had been too small to move 
freely in in flight footage of the crew taken while they were in orbit around 
the moon in the center is frank borman the cruise phase was a relatively 
uneventful part of the flight with little happening except for the crew 
checking that the spacecraft was in working order and they were on course 
during this time nasa scheduled a television broadcast for three one hours 
after launch the camera used was two kg and broadcast in black and white only 
using a vidicon tube it had two lenses a very wide angle one six zero lens and 
a telephoto nine lens during this first broadcast the crew gave a tour of the 
spacecraft and attempted to show how the earth appeared however this proved 
impossible as the narrow angle lens was difficult to aim without the aid of a 
monitor to show what it was looking at also without proper filters the image 
became saturated by any bright source in the end all the crew could do was show 
the people watching back on earth a bright blob after broadcasting for one 
seven minutes the rotation of the spacecraft took the high gain antenna out of 
view of the receiving stations on earth and they ended the transmission with 
lovell wishing his mother happy birthday by this time the planned sleep periods 
had completely been abandoned three two hours into the flight lovell went to 
bed three hours before he had planned to a short while later anders also went 
to bed after taking a sleeping pill somewhat strangely the crew were unable to 
see the moon for much of the outward cruise three of the five windows had 
fogged up due to outgassed oils from the silicone sealant and due to the 
attitude required for the ptc the moon was almost impossible to see from inside 
the spacecraft in fact it was not until the crew had gone behind the moon that 
they would be able to see it for the first time a second television broadcast 
came at five five hours this time the crew had managed to rig up filters meant 
for the still cameras so that they could acquire images of the earth through 
the telephoto lens although difficult to aim as they had to maneuver the entire 
spacecraft the crew was able to broadcast back to earth the first television 
pictures of the earth the crew spent the transmission describing the earth and 
what was visible and the colors that could be seen the transmission lasted two 
three minutes lunar sphere of influence at about five five hours and four zero 
minutes into the flight the crew of apollo eight became the first humans to 
enter the gravitational sphere of influence of another celestial body or to put 
it another way the moon s gravitational force became stronger than that of the 
earth at the time it happened they were three eight seven five nine mi six two 
three seven seven km from the moon and had a speed of three nine nine zero ft s 
one two one six m s with respect to the moon this historic moment was of little 
interest to the crew as they still calculated their trajectory with respect to 
the launch pad at kennedy space center and would do so until they performed 
their last midcourse correction when they would switch to a reference frame 
based on ideal orientation for the second engine burn they would make in lunar 
orbit it was only thirteen hours until they would be in lunar orbit the last 
major event before lunar orbit insertion was a second midcourse correction it 
was in retrograde against direction of travel and slowed the spacecraft down by 
two zero ft s zero six m s in effect lowering the closest distance that the 
spacecraft would pass the moon at exactly six one hours after launch about two 
four two zero zero mi three nine zero zero zero km from the moon the crew 
burned the rcs for one one seconds they would now pass seven one seven mi one 
one five four km from the lunar surface at six four hours into the flight the 
crew began to prepare for lunar orbit insertion one loi one this maneuver had 
to be performed perfectly and due to orbital mechanics had to be on the far 
side of the moon out of contact with the earth after mission control was polled 
for a go no go decision the crew was told at six eight hours they were go and 
riding the best bird we can find at six eight hours and five eight minutes the 
spacecraft went behind the moon and out of radio contact with the earth with 
ten minutes before the loi one the crew began one last check of the spacecraft 
systems and made sure that every switch was in the correct place then they 
finally got their first glimpses of the moon they had been flying over the 
unlit side and it was lovell who saw the first shafts of sunlight obliquely 
illuminating the lunar surface but the burn was only two minutes away so the 
crew had little time to appreciate the view lunar orbit igniting at six nine 
hours eight minutes and one six seconds after launch the sps burned for four 
minutes and one three seconds placing the crew of apollo eight in orbit around 
the moon the crew described this as being the longest four minutes of their 
lives if the burn had not lasted exactly the right amount of time the 
spacecraft could have ended up in a highly elliptical lunar orbit or even flung 
off into space if it lasted too long they could have ended up impacting the 
moon after making sure the spacecraft was working they finally had a chance to 
look at the moon which they would orbit for the next two zero hours the first 
earthrise photographed by humans on earth mission control continued to wait if 
the crew had not burned the engine or the burn had not lasted the planned 
length of time the crew would appear early from behind the moon however this 
time came and went without apollo eight reappearing and then exactly at the 
predicted moment the signal was received from the spacecraft indicating it was 
in a one nine three three mi by six nine five mi three one one one km by one 
one one nine km orbit about the moon after reporting on the status of the 
spacecraft lovell gave the first description of what the lunar surface looked 
like the moon is essentially grey no color looks like plaster of paris or sort 
of a grayish beach sand we can see quite a bit of detail the sea of fertility 
doesn t stand out as well here as it does back on earth there s not as much 
contrast between that and the surrounding craters the craters are all rounded 
off there s quite a few of them some of them are newer many of them look like 
especially the round ones look like hit by meteorites or projectiles of some 
sort langrenus is quite a huge crater it s got a central cone to it the walls 
of the crater are terraced about six or seven different s on the way down 
lovell continued to describe the terrain that they were passing over one of the 
crew s major tasks was reconnaissance of the planned landing sites on the moon 
especially one in mare tranquillitatis that would be the apollo one one landing 
site the launch time of apollo eight had been chosen to give the best lighting 
conditions for the site a film camera had been set up in one of the windows to 
record a frame every second of the moon below and bill anders would spend much 
of the next two zero hours taking as many photographs as he could of targets of 
interest by the end of the mission the crew would take seven zero zero 
photographs of the moon and one five zero of the earth a portion of the lunar 
near side the large crater in the bottom half of the photo is goclenius 
throughout the hour that the spacecraft was in contact with the earth borman 
kept asking how the data for the sps looked he wanted to make sure that the 
engine was working and could be used to return early to the earth if necessary 
he also asked that they receive a go no go decision before they passed behind 
the moon on each orbit as they reappeared for their second pass in front of the 
moon the crew set up the television to broadcast a view of the lunar surface 
anders described the craters that they were passing over at the end of this 
second orbit they performed the eleven second loi two burn of the sps to 
circularize the orbit to seven zero zero mi by seven one three mi one one two 
six km by one one four eight km over the next two orbits the crew continued to 
keep check of the spacecraft and to observe and photograph the moon during the 
third pass borman read a small prayer for his church as he was meant to lay 
read during the midnight service at st christopher s episcopal church near 
seabrook texas but due to the apollo eight flight was unable a fellow 
parishioner and engineer at mission control rod rose suggested that borman read 
the prayer which could be recorded and then replayed during the service it was 
as the spacecraft came out from behind the moon for its fourth pass across the 
front that the crew witnessed an event never before seen earthrise anders 
glanced out the window and saw a blue and white orb and realized it was the 
earth instantly the crew understood that they needed to take a photograph of 
this anders took both the first photograph which was black and white and then 
later the more famous color photo after the flight borman and anders both 
claimed they took the first earthrise photo lovell also did but more as a joke 
than anything else it was determined that it was probably anders earth as seen 
from apollo eight december two four one nine six eight nasa anders continued to 
take photographs while lovell took the controls of the spacecraft so that 
borman could get some rest as always resting was difficult in the cramped and 
noisy capsule though borman was able to doze for two orbits he would awaken at 
times to ask a question about their status only to be told that everything was 
going fine borman did wake up however when he started to hear his fellow 
crewmembers make mistakes they were beginning to not understand questions and 
would have to ask for the answers to be repeated borman realized that everyone 
was extremely tired having not had a good night s sleep in over three days 
taking command he ordered anders and lovell to get some sleep and that the rest 
of the flight plan regarding observing the moon be scrubbed at first anders 
protested saying that he was fine but borman would not be swayed at last anders 
agreed as long as the commander would set up the camera to continue to take 
automatic shots of the moon borman also remembered that there was a second 
television broadcast planned and with so many people expected to be watching he 
wanted to crew to be alert for the next two orbits anders and lovell slept 
while borman sat at the helm as they rounded the moon for the ninth time the 
second television transmission began borman introduced the crew followed by 
each man giving his impression of the lunar surface and what it was like to be 
orbiting the moon borman described it as being a vast lonely forbidding type of 
existence or expanse of nothing and then after talking about what they were 
flying over anders said that the crew had a message for all those on earth the 
only thing left for the crew now was to perform the trans earth injection or 
tei which would occur two hours after the end of the television transmission 
this was the most critical burn of the whole flight if the sps failed to ignite 
then the crew would be stuck in orbit around the moon with only about five more 
days of oxygen and no chance of escape and once again the burn had to be 
performed while the crew was out of contact with earth on the far side of the 
moon the burn occurred perfectly on time the spacecraft telemetry was 
reacquired as it re emerged from behind the moon at eight nine hours two eight 
minutes and three nine seconds the exact time predicted when voice contact was 
regained lovell announced please be informed there is a santa claus to which 
ken mattingly the capcom replied that s affirmative you are the best ones to 
know it was christmas day one nine six eight rupes cauchy in eastern mare 
tranquillitatis unplanned manual re alignment later lovell used some otherwise 
idle time to do some navigational sightings maneuvering the module to view 
various stars by using the computer keyboard however an accidental entry erased 
some of the computer s memory which caused the inertial measuring unit imu to 
think the module was in the same relative position it had been in before lift 
off and fire the thrusters to correct the module s attitude once the crew 
realized why the computer had changed the module s attitude they realized they 
would have to re enter data that would tell the computer its real position it 
took lovell ten minutes to figure out the right numbers using the thrusters to 
get the stars rigel and sirius aligned and another fifteen minutes to enter the 
corrected data into the computer sixteen months later lovell would once again 
have to perform a similar manual re alignment under more critical conditions 
during the apollo one three mission after that module s imu had to be turned 
off to conserve energy in his one nine nine four book lost moon the perilous 
voyage of apollo one three later re titled apollo one three when the movie 
based on it apollo one three came out lovell wrote my training on apollo eight 
came in handy in that book he dismissed the incident as a planned experiment 
requested by the ground crew however in subsequent interviews lovell has 
acknowledged that the incident was an accident caused by his mistake as 
described in robert zimmerman s one nine nine eight book genesis the story of 
apollo eight cruise back to earth and re entry the cruise back to earth was 
mostly a time for the crew to relax and monitor the spacecraft as long as the 
trajectory specialists had calculated everything correctly the spacecraft would 
re enter two days after tei and splashdown in the pacific on christmas 
afternoon the crew made their fifth and final television broadcast this time 
they gave a tour of the spacecraft showing how an astronaut lived in space when 
they had finished broadcasting they found a small present from deke slayton in 
the food locker real turkey with stuffing and three miniature bottles of brandy 
which remained unopened there were also small presents to the crew from their 
wives the apollo eight command module on the deck of the uss yorktown after two 
uneventful days the crew prepared for re entry the computer would control the 
re entry and all the crew had to do was put the spacecraft in the correct 
attitude blunt end forward if the computer broke down borman would take over 
after separating from the service module all the crew could do was sit and wait 
six minutes before they hit the top of the atmosphere the crew saw the moon 
rising above the earth s horizon just as had been predicted by the trajectory 
specialists as they hit the thin outer atmosphere they noticed it was becoming 
hazy outside as glowing plasma formed around the capsule the capsule started 
slowing down and the deceleration peaked at six g five nine m s with the 
computer controlling the descent by changing the attitude of the capsule apollo 
eight rose briefly like a skipping stone before descending to the ocean at 
three zero zero zero zero feet nine km the drogue parachute stabilized the 
spacecraft and was followed at one zero zero zero zero feet three km by the 
three main parachutes the spacecraft splashdown position was estimated to be 
when it hit the water the parachutes dragged the spacecraft over and left it 
upside down in what was termed stable two position as they were buffeted by a 
one zero foot three m swell borman was sick waiting for the three floatation 
balloons to right the capsule it was four three minutes after splashdown before 
the first frogman from the uss yorktown arrived as the capsule had landed 
before sunrise forty five minutes later they were on the deck of the aircraft 
carrier the command module is now displayed at the chicago museum of science 
and industry along with a collection of personal items from the flight donated 
by lovell and frank borman s spacesuit jim lovell s spacesuit can be found at 
nasa s glenn research center historical importance apollo eight came at the end 
of one nine six eight a year that had seen much upheaval around the world 
soviet tanks had put a stop to the prague spring in czechoslovakia martin 
luther king jr and robert f kennedy had been assassinated the vietnam war had 
escalated with the tet offensive university campuses across the united states 
had seen rioting and occupation of buildings by students may had seen rioting 
in paris that almost led to revolution yet over all these other events time 
magazine chose the crew of apollo eight as their men of the year for one nine 
six eight recognizing them as the people that most influenced events in the 
preceding year they had been the first people to ever leave the gravitational 
influence of the earth and orbit another celestial body they had survived a 
mission that even the crew themselves had rated as only having a fifty fifty 
chance of fully succeeding the effect of apollo eight can be summed up by a 
telegram from a stranger received by borman after the mission that simply 
stated thank you apollo eight you saved one nine six eight january three one 
nine six nine cover of time magazine with the apollo eight crew one of the most 
famous aspects of the flight was the earthrise picture that was taken as they 
came around for their fourth orbit of the moon although it was not the first 
image taken of the whole earth nor would it be the last this was the first time 
that humans had taken such a picture some regard the picture as being the start 
of the environmentalist movement with the first earth day in one nine seven 
zero the mission was the most widely covered by the media since the first 
american orbital flight mercury atlas six by john glenn in one nine six two 
there were one two zero zero journalists covering the mission with the bbc 
coverage being broadcast in five four countries in one five different languages 
the soviet newspaper pravda even covered the flight without the usual anti 
american editorializing it is estimated that a quarter of the people alive at 
the time saw either live or delayed the christmas eve transmission during the 
ninth orbit of the moon it had a tremendous impact touring the world after the 
mission borman met with pope paul vi he was told i have spent my entire life 
trying to say to the world what you did on christmas eve the militant atheist 
madalyn murray o hair later caused controversy by bringing a lawsuit against 
nasa over the reading from genesis she wished the courts to ban us astronauts 
who were all government employees from public prayer in space this was 
eventually rejected by the courts but it caused nasa to be skittish about the 
issue of religion throughout the rest of the apollo program buzz aldrin on 
apollo one one took communion on the surface of the moon after landing he 
refrained from mentioning this publicly for several years and only obliquely 
referred to it at the time crew frank borman flew on gemini seven cassutt 
michael one nine nine five deke an autobiography forge books isbn zero three 
one two eight five nine one eight x compiled by nasa manned spacecraft center 
one nine six nine analysis of apollo eight photography and visual observations 
us government printing office nasa pdf online version apollo program human 
spaceflights lunar spacecraft one nine six eight in the united states u s space 
shuttle astronaut bruce mccandless ii using a manned maneuvering unit mmu 
outside the challenger in one nine eight four picture courtesy nasa an 
astronaut cosmonaut russian spationaut or taikonaut taikongren is a person who 
travels into space or who makes a career of doing so the criteria for 
determining who has achieved human spaceflight vary see edge of space in the 
united states people who travel above an altitude of five zero miles eight zero 
km are designated as astronauts the fai defines spaceflight as over one zero 
zero km six one miles as of october one two two zero zero five a total of four 
four eight humans have reached space according to the u s definition four four 
two people qualify under the fai definition while four three eight people have 
reached earth orbit or beyond these individuals have spent over two eight zero 
zero zero crew days or a cumulative total of seven six seven years in space 
including over one zero zero crew days of spacewalks a person who has traveled 
in space is said to hold astronaut wings astronauts from at least three four 
countries have gone into space international variations by convention a space 
traveller employed by the russian aviation and space agency or its soviet 
predecessor is called a cosmonaut cosmonaut is an anglicisation of the russian 
word kosmonavt which in turn derives from the greek words kosmos universe and 
nautes sailor in the usa a space traveller is called an astronaut the term 
derives from the greek words stron star and nautes sailor for the most part 
cosmonaut and astronaut are synonyms in all languages and the usage of choice 
is often dictated by political reasons however in the united states the term 
astronaut is typically applied to the individual as soon as training begins 
while in russia an individual is not labeled a cosmonaut until successful space 
flight the first known use of the term was by neil r jones in his short story 
the death s head meteor in one nine three zero on march one four one nine nine 
five astronaut norman thagard became the first american to ride to space on 
board a russian launch vehicle arguably becoming the first american cosmonaut 
in the process european outside of the uk space travellers are sometimes 
especially in french speaking countries called spationauts a hybrid word formed 
from the latin spatium space and greek nautes sailor apart from the soviet 
union europe has not yet produced manned spacecraft but has sent men and women 
into space in cooperation with russia and the united states taikonaut is 
sometimes used in english for astronauts from china by western news media the 
term was coined in may one nine nine eight by chiew lee yih from malaysia who 
used it first in newsgroups almost simultaneously chen lan coined it for use in 
the western media based on the term t ik ng literally great emptiness chinese 
for space in chinese itself however a single term y h ng yu n universe 
navigator has long been used for astronauts the closest term using taikong is a 
colloquialism t ik ng r n space person which refers to people who have actually 
been in space official english texts issued by the chinese government use 
astronaut space milestones yuri gagarin valentina tereshkova the first attempt 
ever in human history to use rocket for a spaceflight was done in the one six 
th century by a chinese ming dynasty official a skilled stargazer named wan hu 
this attempt was not successful the first cosmonaut was yuri gagarin who was 
launched into space on april one two one nine six one aboard vostok one the 
first woman cosmonaut was valentina tereshkova launched into space in june one 
nine six three aboard vostok six alan shepard became the first american in 
space in may one nine six one vladimir remek became the first non soviet 
european in space in one nine seven eight on a russian soyuz rocket on july two 
three one nine eight zero pham tuan of vietnam became the first asian in space 
when he flew aboard soyuz three seven also in one nine eight zero arnaldo 
tamayo m ndez became the first person of african descent to fly in space the 
first person born in africa to fly in space was patrick baudry in june one nine 
eight five shannon lucid became the first chinese born person in space in two 
zero zero two mark shuttleworth became the first citizen of an african country 
to fly in space on one five october two zero zero three yang liwei became china 
s first astronaut on the shenzhou five spacecraft the first mission to orbit 
the moon was apollo eight which included william anders who was born in hong 
kong making him the first asian born astronaut in one nine six eight the 
youngest person to fly in space is gherman titov who was roughly two six years 
old when he flew vostok two and the oldest is john glenn who was seven seven 
when he flew on sts nine five the longest stay in space was four three eight 
days by valeri polyakov as of two zero zero five the most spaceflights by an 
individual astronaut was seven a record held by both jerry l ross and franklin 
chang diaz the furthest distance from earth an astronaut has traveled was four 
zero one zero five six km during the apollo one three emergency the first non 
governmental astronaut was byron k lichtenberg an mit researcher who flew on 
space shuttle mission sts nine in one nine eight three in december one nine 
nine zero toyohiro akiyama became the first commercial space farer as a 
reporter for tbs who paid for his flight the first self funded space tourist 
was dennis tito on two eight april two zero zero one while the first astronaut 
to fly on an entirely privately funded mission was mike melvill on spaceshipone 
flight one five p though this flight was sub orbital in the united states 
persons selected as astronaut candidates receive silver astronaut wings once 
they have flown in space they receive gold astronaut wings the united states 
air force also presents astronaut wings to its pilots who exceed five zero 
miles eight zero km in altitude international astronauts astronauts on the 
international space station british astronaut michael foale can be seen 
exercising in the foreground up until the end of the one nine seven zero s only 
americans and soviets were active astronauts in one nine seven six the soviets 
started the intercosmos program with a first group of six cosmonauts from 
fellow eastern bloc countries and cuba a second group started training in one 
nine seven eight at about the same time in one nine seven eight the european 
space agency selected four astronauts to train for the first spacelab mission 
on board of the space shuttle in one nine eight zero france started their own 
selection of astronauts followed in one nine eight two by germany in one nine 
eight three by the canadian space program in one nine eight five by japan and 
italy in one nine eight eight several international payload specialists were 
selected for the space shuttle and also later for international soyuz missions 
of russia in one nine nine eight the european space agency formed a single 
astronaut corps of one eight by dissolving the former national corps of france 
germany and italy the united kingdom does not contribute to esa s human 
spaceflight programme and so its citizens must receive training from either the 
united states or russia if they wish to become astronauts astronaut training 
the first astronauts both in the usa and ussr tended to be jet fighter pilots 
often test pilots from military backgrounds u s military astronauts receive a 
special qualification badge known as the astronaut badge upon completion of 
astronaut training and participation in a space flight astronaut deaths dick 
scobee commander of the space shuttle challenger during the sts five one l 
mission to date eighteen astronauts have been killed on space missions and at 
least ten more have been killed in ground based training accidents see also 
space disaster trivia many people who claim the apollo moon landings were faked 
often call the astronauts astronots see also list of astronauts by name list of 
astronauts by selection timeline of astronauts by nationality list of human 
spaceflights one nine six one one nine eight six one nine eight seven one nine 
nine nine two zero zero zero present list of spacewalks and moonwalks x one 
five spaceflight records shirley thomas author of men of space series one nine 
six zero one nine six eight external links encyclopedia astronautica 
encyclopedia astronautica phantom cosmonauts astronauts transportation 
occupations science occupations a modest proposal for preventing the children 
of poor people in ireland from being a burden to their parents or country and 
for making them beneficial to the publick commonly referred to as a modest 
proposal is a satirical pamphlet written by jonathan swift in one seven two 
nine the work has now become one of the epitomes of satire and the modern 
phrase a modest proposal derives from the work theme the work is written in 
first person point of view however the narrator should not be confused with 
swift himself because the writer is merely a persona he argues through economic 
reasoning as well as a self righteous moral stance for a way to turn the 
problem of squalor among the catholics in ireland into its own solution his 
proposal is to fatten up the undernourished children and feed them to ireland s 
rich land owners children of the poor could be sold into a meat market at the 
age of one thus combating overpopulation and unemployment sparing families the 
expense of child rearing while providing them with a little extra income 
improving the culinary experience of the wealthy and contributing to the 
overall economic well being of the nation he offers statistical support for his 
assertions and gives specific data about the number of children to be sold 
their weight and price and the projected consumption patterns he suggests some 
recipes for preparing this delicious new meat and he feels sure that innovative 
cooks will be quick to generate more he also anticipates that the practice of 
selling and eating children will have positive effects on family morality 
husbands will treat their wives with more respect and parents will value their 
children in ways hitherto unknown his conclusion is that the implementation of 
this project will do more to solve ireland s complex social political and 
economic problems than any other measure that has been proposed this is widely 
believed to be the greatest example of sustained irony in the history of the 
english language reactions the satirical intent of a modest proposal was 
misunderstood by many of swift s peers and he was harshly criticized for 
writing prose in such exceptionally bad taste he came close to losing his 
patronage because of this essay the misunderstanding of the intent of the 
satirical attack came about largely because of the disparity between the 
satirical intent of the cannibalistic proposal and the sincere tone of the 
narrative voice modern usage in modern usage the phrase modest proposal has 
come to indicate a proposal that is anything but modest such a proposal may 
serve to advance a cause or argument by promoting discussion on the merits of 
the argument s opposite other examples of modest proposals modest proposals and 
other literary hoaxes report from iron mountain sokal affair miscegenation 
origin of the word dihydrogen monoxide jack thompson attorney has been 
criticised for writing an open letter similar to swift s piece one that 
included a promise of donating money to charity external links a modest 
proposal gutenberg free audiobook from librivox sniggle net modest proposals 
satire essays non fictional british literature one seven two nine books the 
alkali metals are the series of elements in group one iupac style of the 
periodic table excluding hydrogen in all but one rare circumstance lithium li 
sodium na potassium k rubidium rb caesium cs and francium fr they are all 
highly reactive and are never found in elemental form in nature the alkali 
metals are silver colored caesium has a golden tinge soft low density metals 
which react readily with halogens to form ionic salts and with water to form 
strongly alkaline basic hydroxides these elements all have one electron in 
their outermost shell so the energetically preferred state of achieving a 
filled electron shell is to lose one electron to form a singly charged positive 
ion hydrogen with a solitary electron is sometimes placed at the top of group 
one but it is not an alkali metal except under extreme circumstances as 
metallic hydrogen rather it exists naturally as a diatomic gas removal of its 
single electron requires considerably more energy than removal of the outer 
electron for the alkali metals as in the halogens only one additional electron 
is required to fill in the outermost shell of the hydrogen atom so hydrogen can 
in some circumstances behave like a halogen forming the negative hydride ion 
binary compounds of hydride with the alkali metals and some transition metals 
have been prepared under extremely high pressure such as is found at the core 
of jupiter hydrogen does become metallic and behaves like an alkali metal see 
metallic hydrogen alkali metals periodic table in logic the argument form or 
test form of an argument results from replacing the different words or 
sentences that make up the argument with letters along the lines of algebra the 
letters represent logical variables the sentence forms which classify argument 
forms of common arguments important are studied in college logic here is an 
example of an argument a all humans are mortal socrates is human therefore 
socrates is mortal we can rewrite argument a by putting each sentence on its 
own line b all humans are mortal socrates is human therefore socrates is mortal 
to demonstrate the important notion of the form of an argument substitute 
letters for similar items throughout b c all s are p a is s therefore a is p 
all we have done in c is to put s for human and humans p for mortal and a for 
socrates what results c is the form of the original argument in a so argument 
form c is the form of argument a moreover each individual sentence of c is the 
sentence form of its respective sentence in a attention is given to argument 
and sentence form because form is what makes an argument valid or cogent some 
examples of valid arguments forms are modus ponens modus tollens and the 
disjunctive syllogism two invalid argument forms are affirming the consequent 
and denying the antecedent see also analytic proposition synthetic proposition 
logic an alphabet is a complete standardized set of letters basic written 
symbols each of which roughly represents a phoneme of a spoken language either 
as it exists now or as it may have been in the past there are other systems of 
writing such as logograms in which each symbol represents a morpheme or word 
and syllabaries in which each symbol represents a syllable the word alphabet 
itself comes from alpha and beta the first two symbols of the greek alphabet 
there are dozens of alphabets in use today most of them are linear which means 
that they are made up of lines notable exceptions are the braille alphabet 
morse code and the cuneiform alphabet of the ancient city of ugarit types the 
term alphabet is currently used by linguists both in a wider and in a narrower 
sense in the wider sense the term refers to any script that is segmental on the 
phoneme level i e that has separate glyphs for individual sounds and not for 
larger units such as syllables or words in the narrower sense some scholars 
distinguish true alphabets from two other subtypes abjads and abugidas the 
three types differ from each other in the way vowels are treated in relation to 
consonants abjads record only consonants and leave vowels or most vowels 
unexpressed in abugidas the vowels are indicated by diacritical marks or 
systematic modification of the form of the consonants in alphabets in the 
narrow sense both consonants and vowels have separate symbols the first 
alphabet in the wider sense was the proto canaanite alphabet an abjad which 
through its successor phoenician became the ancestor of all later alphabets the 
first alphabet in the narrow sense was the greek alphabet examples of present 
day abjads are the arabic and hebrew scripts true alphabets include latin 
cyrillic and korean hangul and abugidas are used to write amharic hindi and 
thai the canadian aboriginal syllabics are also an abugida rather than a 
syllabary as a glyph stands for a consonant and is rotated to represent the 
vowel rather than each consonant vowel combination being represented by a 
separate glyph as in a true syllabary the boundaries between these three types 
are not always clear cut for example iraqi kurdish is written in the arabic 
script which is normally an abjad however in kurdish writing the vowels is 
mandatory and full letters are used so the script is a true alphabet other 
languages may use a semitic abjad with mandatory vowel diacritics effectively 
making them abugidas on the other hand the phagspa script of the mongol empire 
was based closely on the tibetan abugida but all vowel marks were written after 
the preceding consonant rather than as diacritic marks although short a was not 
written as in the abugidas one could argue that the linear arrangement made 
this a true alphabet conversely the vowel marks of the amharic abugida have 
been so completely assimilated into their consonants that the system is learned 
as a syllabary rather than as a segmental script even more extreme the pahlavi 
abjad became logographic see below thus the primary classification of alphabets 
reflects how they treat vowels for tonal languages further classification can 
be based on the treatment of tone though there are as yet no names to 
distinguish the various types some alphabets disregard tone entirely especially 
when it does not carry a heavy functional load as in somali and many other 
languages of africa and the americas such scripts are to tone what abjads are 
to vowels most commonly tones are indicated with diacritics the way vowels are 
treated in abugidas this is the case for vietnamese a true alphabet and thai an 
abugida in thai tone is determined primarily by the choice of consonant with 
diacritics for disambiguation in the pollard script an abugida vowels are 
indicated by diacritics but the placement of the vowel relative to the 
consonant indicates the tone more rarely a script has separate letters for the 
tones as is the case for hmong and zhuang for many of these languages 
regardless of whether letters or diacritics are used the most common tone is 
not marked just as the most common vowel is not marked in indic abugidas 
alphabets can be quite small the book pahlavi script an abjad had only twelve 
letters at one point and may have had even fewer later on today the rotokas 
alphabet has only twelve letters the hawaiian alphabet is sometimes claimed to 
be as small but it actually consists of one eight letters including the okina 
and five long vowels while rotokas has a small alphabet because it has few 
phonemes to represent just eleven book pahlavi was small because many letters 
had been conflated that is the graphic distinctions had been lost over time and 
diacritics were not developed to compensate for this as they were in arabic 
another script that lost many of its distinct letter shapes for example a comma 
shaped letter represented g d y k and j however such simplifications can 
perversely make a script more complicated in later pahlavi papyri up to half of 
the remaining graphic distinctions were lost and the script could no longer be 
read as a sequence of letters at all but had to be learned as word symbols that 
is as logograms like egyptian demotic the largest segmental script is probably 
an abugida devanagari when written in devanagari vedic sanskrit has an alphabet 
of five three letters including the visarga mark for final aspiration and 
special letters for k and j though one of the letters is theoretical and not 
actually used the hindi alphabet must represent both sanskrit and modern 
vocabulary and so has been expanded to five eight with the khutma letters 
letters with a dot added to represent sounds from persian and english the 
largest known abjad is sindhi with five one letters the largest true alphabets 
include kabardian and abxaz for cyrillic with five eight and five six letters 
respectively and slovak for the latin alphabet with four six however these 
scripts either include di and tri graphs similar to spanish ch or diacritics 
like slovak the largest true alphabet where each letter is graphically 
independent is probably georgian with four one letters syllabaries typically 
include five zero to four zero zero glyphs though the m ra pirah language of 
brazil would require only two four if tone were not indicated and rotokas three 
zero and the glyphs of logographic systems number from the hundreds to the 
thousands thus a simple count of the number of distinct symbols is an important 
clue to the nature of an unknown script it is not always clear what constitutes 
a distinct alphabet french uses the same basic alphabet as english but many of 
the letters can carry diacritic and other marks for example or in french these 
marks are not considered to create additional letters however in icelandic the 
accented letters such as and are considered distinct letters of the alphabet 
some adaptations of the latin alphabet are augmented with ligatures such as in 
old english and in algonquian by borrowings from other alphabets such as the 
thorn in old english and icelandic which came from the futhark runes and by 
modifying existing letters such as the eth of old english and icelandic which 
came from d other alphabets only use a subset of the latin alphabet such as 
hawaiian or italian which only uses the letters j k x y and w for foreign words 
spelling each language may establish certain general rules that govern the 
association between letters and phonemes but depending on the language these 
rules may or may not be consistently followed in a perfectly phonological 
alphabet the phonemes and letters would correspond perfectly in two directions 
a writer could predict the spelling of a word given its pronunciation and a 
speaker could predict the pronunciation of a word given its spelling however 
languages often evolve independently of their writing systems and writing 
systems have been borrowed for languages they were not designed for so the 
degree to which letters of an alphabet correspond to phonemes of a language 
varies greatly from one language to another and even within a single language 
languages may fail to achieve a one to one correspondence between letters and 
sounds in any of several ways a language may represent a given phoneme with a 
combination of letters rather than just a single letter two letter combinations 
are called digraphs and three letter groups are called trigraphs kabardian uses 
a tesseragraph four letters for one of its phonemes a language may represent 
the same phoneme with two different letters or combinations of letters a 
language may spell some words with unpronounced letters that exist for 
historical or other reasons pronunciation of individual words may change 
according to the presence of surrounding words in a sentence different dialects 
of a language may use different phonemes for the same word a language may use 
different sets of symbols or different rules for distinct sets of vocabulary 
items such as the japanese hiragana and katakana syllabaries or the various 
rules in english for spelling words from latin and greek or the original 
germanic vocabulary national languages generally elect to address the problem 
of dialects by simply associating the alphabet with the national standard 
however with an international language with wide variations in its dialects 
such as english it would be impossible to represent the language in all its 
variations with a single phonetic alphabet some national languages like finnish 
have a very regular spelling system with a nearly one to one correspondence 
between letters and phonemes the italian verb corresponding to spell compitare 
is unknown to many italians because the act of spelling itself is almost never 
needed each phoneme of standard italian is represented in only one way however 
pronunciation cannot always be predicted from spelling because certain letters 
are pronounced in more than one way in standard spanish it is possible to tell 
the pronunciation of a word from its spelling but not vice versa this is 
because certain phonemes can be represented in more than one way but a given 
letter is consistently pronounced french with its silent letters and its heavy 
use of nasal vowels and elision may seem to lack much correspondence between 
spelling and pronunciation but its rules on pronunciation are actually 
consistent and predictable with a fair degree of accuracy at the other extreme 
however are languages such as english and irish where the spelling of many 
words simply has to be memorized as they do not correspond to sounds in a 
consistent way for english this is because the great vowel shift occurred after 
the orthography was established and because english has acquired a large number 
of loanwords at different times retaining their original spelling at varying 
levels however even english has general rules that predict pronunciation from 
spelling and these rules are successful most of the time the sounds of speech 
of all languages of the world can be written by a rather small universal 
phonetic alphabet a standard for this is the international phonetic alphabet 
collation an alphabet also serves to establish an order among letters that can 
be used for sorting entries in lists called collating note that the order does 
not have to be constant among different languages using this alphabet for 
examples see latin alphabet collating in other languages in recent years the 
unicode initiative has attempted to collate most of the world s known writing 
systems into a single character encoding as well as its primary purpose of 
standardising computer processing of non roman scripts the unicode project has 
provided a focus for script related scholarship the alphabet effect some 
communication theorists notably those associated with the so called toronto 
school of communications such as marshall mcluhan harold innis and more 
recently robert k logan have advanced hypotheses to the effect that alphabetic 
scripts in particular have served to promote and encourage the skills of 
analysis coding decoding and classification this set of hypotheses may be known 
as the alphabet effect after the title of logan s one nine eight six work the 
theory claims that a greater level of abstraction is required due to the 
greater economy of symbols in alphabetic systems and this abstraction needed to 
interpret phonemic symbols in turn has contributed in some way to the 
development of the societies which use it proponents of this theory hold that 
the development of alphabetic as distinct to other types of writing systems has 
made a significant impact on western thinking and development because it 
introduced a new level of abstraction analysis and classification mcluhan and 
logan one nine seven seven postulates that as a result of these skills the use 
of the alphabet created an environment conducive to the development of codified 
law monotheism abstract science deductive logic objective history and 
individualism according to logan all of these innovations including the 
alphabet arose within the very narrow geographic zone between the tigris 
euphrates river system and the aegean sea and within the very narrow time frame 
between two zero zero zero b c and five zero zero b c logan two zero zero four 
however many of these abstractions first occurred in societies which did not 
use an alphabet such as the codified law of hammurabi in babylonia which 
predated similar codes in societies with the alphabet since the alphabet 
quickly spread to become nearly ubiquitous it is difficult to trace cause and 
effect in this matter see also abecedarium abjad abugida akshara alphabetical 
order alphabets derived from the latin artificial scripts character set 
lipogram list of alphabets syllabary transliteration unicode a b c d e f g h i 
j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z references overview of modern and some 
ancient writing systems chapter three traces and summarizes the invention of 
alphabetic writing mcluhan marshall logan robert k one nine seven seven 
alphabet mother of invention etcetera vol three four pp three seven three three 
eight three chapter four traces the invention of writing external links 
alphabetic writing systems michael everson s alphabets of europe the unicode 
consortium evolution of alphabets animation by prof robert fradkin at the 
university of maryland history of alphabet the hebrew alphabet alphabetic 
writing systems documents writing in chemistry and physics the atomic number z 
is the number of protons found in the nucleus of an atom in an atom of neutral 
charge the number of electrons also equals the atomic number the atomic number 
originally meant the number of an element s place in the periodic table when 
mendeleyev arranged the known chemical elements grouped by their similarities 
in chemistry it was noticeable that placing them in strict order of atomic mass 
resulted in some mismatches iodine and tellurium if listed by atomic mass 
appeared to be in the wrong order and would fit better if their places in the 
table were swapped placing them in the order which fit chemical properties most 
closely their number in the table was their atomic number this number appeared 
to be approximately proportional to the mass of the atom but as the discrepancy 
showed reflected some other property than mass the anomalies in this sequence 
were finally explained after research by henry gwyn jeffreys moseley in one 
nine one three moseley discovered a strict relationship between the x ray 
diffraction spectra of elements and their correct location in the periodic 
table it was later shown that the atomic number corresponds to the electric 
charge of the nucleus in other words the number of protons it is the charge 
which gives elements their chemical properties rather than the atomic mass the 
atomic number is closely related to the mass number although they should not be 
confused which is the number of protons and neutrons in the nucleus of an atom 
the mass number often comes after the name of the element e g carbon one four 
used in carbon dating see also periodic table list of elements by number 
effective atomic number chemical properties nuclear physics anatomical drawing 
of the human muscles from the encyclop die anatomical chart from the 
cyclopaedia one seven two eight anatomy from the greek anatomia from anatemnein 
to cut up cut open is the branch of biology that deals with the structure and 
organization of living things it can be divided into animal anatomy zootomy and 
plant anatomy phytonomy furthermore anatomy can be covered either regionally or 
systemically that is studying anatomy by bodily regions such as the head and 
chest for the former or studying by specific systems such as the nervous or 
respiratory systmes for the latter major branches of anatomy include 
comparative anatomy histology and human anatomy animal anatomy animal anatomy 
may include the study of the structure of different animals when it is called 
comparative anatomy or animal morphology or it may be limited to one animal 
only in which case it is spoken of as special anatomy human anatomy from a 
utilitarian point of view the study of humans is the most important division of 
special anatomy and this human anatomy may be approached from different points 
of view from that of medicine it consists of a knowledge of the exact form 
position size and relationship of the various structures of the healthy human 
body and to this study the term descriptive or topographical human anatomy is 
given though it is often less happily spoken of as anthropotomy so intricate is 
the human body that only a small number of professional human anatomists after 
years of patient observation are complete masters of all its details most of 
them specialize on certain parts such as the brain or viscera contenting 
themselves with a good working knowledge of the rest topographical anatomy must 
be learned by repeated dissection and inspection of dead human bodies it is no 
more a science than a pilot s knowledge is and like that knowledge must be 
exact and available in moments of emergency from the morphological point of 
view however human anatomy is a scientific and fascinating study having for its 
object the discovery of the causes which have brought about the existing 
structure of humans and needing a knowledge of the allied sciences of 
embryology or developmental biology phylogeny and histology pathological 
anatomy or morbid anatomy is the study of diseased organs while sections of 
normal anatomy applied to various purposes receive special names such as 
medical surgical gynaecological artistic and superficial anatomy the comparison 
of the anatomy of different races of humans is part of the science of physical 
anthropology or anthropological anatomy in the present edition of this work the 
subject of anatomy is treated systematically rather than topographically each 
anatomical article contains first a description of the structures of an organ 
or system such as nerves arteries heart and so forth as it is found in humans 
this is followed by an account of the development embryology and comparative 
anatomy morphology as far as vertebrate animals are concerned but only those 
parts of the lower animals which are of interest in explaining human body 
structure are here dealt with the articles have a twofold purpose first to give 
enough details of structure to make the articles on physiology surgery medicine 
and pathology intelligible and secondly to give the non expert inquirer or the 
worker in some other branch of science the chief theories on which the modern 
scientific groundwork of anatomy is built major body systems circulatory system 
digestive system endocrine system excretory system immune system integumentary 
system lymphatic system muscular system nervous system reproductive system 
respiratory system skeletal system human skeleton organs anus appendix brain 
breast colon or large intestine diaphragm ear eye heart kidney labia larynx 
liver lung nose ovary pharynx pancreas penis placenta rectum skin small 
intestine spleen stomach tongue uterus bones in the human skeleton collar bone 
clavicle thigh bone femur humerus mandible patella radius skull cranium tibia 
ulna rib costa vertebrae pelvis sternum glands ductless gland mammary gland 
salivary gland thyroid gland parathyroid gland adrenal gland pituitary gland 
pineal gland tissues connective tissue endothelial tissue epithelial tissue 
glandular tissue lymphoid tissue externally visible parts of the human body 
abdomen arm back buttock chest ear eye face genitals head joint leg mouth neck 
scalp skin teeth tongue other anatomic terms not classified artery coelom 
diaphragm gastrointestinal tract hair exoskeleton lip nerve peritoneum serous 
membrane skeleton skull spinal cord vein see also list of anatomical topics 
list of human anatomical features important publications in anatomy history of 
anatomy human anatomy organ anatomy superficial anatomy zootomical terms for 
location external links high resolution cytoarchitectural primate brain atlases 
free online anatomy atlas the npac visible human viewer on line medical 
dictionary anatomy of the human body by henry gray online radiology anatomy 
resources gray s anatomy wiki http immunity info net anatomy atlases a digital 
library of anatomy information anatomy affirming the consequent is a logical 
fallacy in the form of a hypothetical proposition propositionally speaking 
affirming the consequent is the logical equivalent of assuming the converse of 
a statement to be true the fallacy of affirming the consequent occurs when a 
hypothetical proposition comprising an antecedent and a consequent asserts that 
the truthhood of the consequent implies the truthhood of the antecedent this is 
fallacious because it assumes a bidirectionality when it does not necessarily 
exist this fallacy has the following argument form if p then q q therefore p 
this logical error is called the fallacy of affirming the consequent because it 
is mistakenly concluded from the second premise that the affirmation of the 
consequent entails the truthhood of the antecedent one way to demonstrate the 
invalidity is to use a counterexample here is an argument that is obviously 
incorrect if stephen king wrote the bible p then stephen king is a good writer 
q stephen king is a good writer q therefore stephen king wrote the bible p the 
previous argument was obviously incorrect but the next argument may be more 
deceiving if someone is human p then she is mortal q anna is mortal q therefore 
anna is human p but in fact anna can be a cat very much a mortal but not a 
human one however be aware that a similar argument form is valid in which the 
first premise asserts if and only if rather than if similarly the converse of a 
statement can be validly assumed to be true so long as the if and only if 
phrase is attached see also modus ponens modus tollens denying the antecedent 
fallacy of the undistributed middle logical fallacies andrei tarkovsky andrei 
arsenyevich tarkovsky april four one nine three two december two eight one nine 
eight six was a russian movie director writer and actor he is regarded as one 
of the most important and influential filmmakers of the soviet era in russia 
and one of the greatest in the history of cinema biography tarkovsky son of the 
prominent poet arseniy tarkovsky was a product of the golden era of soviet arts 
education he received a classical education in moscow studying music and arabic 
before training for over five years at the vgik film school studying directly 
under mikhail romm among others he also worked as a geologist in siberia 
although the orthodox christian symbolism of his films led to prevarication and 
occasional suppression of the finished product by the soviet authorities the 
soviet mosfilm studio system enabled him to make films that would not have been 
commercially viable in the west however tarkovsky s principal complaint about 
his treatment by the authorities was that he had many more ideas in him than he 
was allowed to bring to the screen and in one nine eight four after shooting 
nostalghia in italy he decided not to return to russia he made only one more 
film the sacrifice a european co production filmed in sweden before dying of 
cancer in the suburb of paris at the early age of five four andrei tarkovsky 
was buried in a graveyard for russian migr s in the town of sainte genevi ve 
des bois le de france france work tarkovsky s films are characterised by 
metaphysical themes extremely long takes and memorable images of exceptional 
beauty recurring motifs in his films are dreams memory childhood running water 
accompanied by fire rain indoors reflections and characters re appearing in the 
foreground of long panning movements of the camera tarkovsky developed a theory 
of cinema that he called sculpting in time by this he meant that the unique 
characteristic of cinema as a medium was to take our experience of time and 
alter it unedited movie footage transcribes time in real time the speedy jump 
cutting style that is prevalent in mtv videos and hollywood movies by contrast 
overrides any sense of time by imposing the editor s viewpoint by using long 
takes and few cuts in his films he aimed to give the viewers a sense of time 
passing time lost and the relationship of one moment in time to another up to 
and including his film mirror tarkovsky focused his cinematic works on 
exploring this theory after mirror he announced that he would focus his work on 
exploring the dramatic unities proposed by aristotle a concentrated action 
happening in one place within the span of a single day the sacrifice is the 
only film that truly reflects this ambition it is also considered by many to be 
a near perfect reflection of the sculpting in time theory filmography the 
killers one nine five eight tarkovsky s first student film at vgik the soviet 
state film school concentrate one nine five eight tarkovsky s second student 
film at vgik the soviet state film school there will be no leave today one nine 
five nine tarkovsky s final student film at vgik the soviet state film school 
the steamroller and the violin one nine six zero tarkovsky s graduation film 
from vgik the soviet state film school cowritten with andrei konchalovsky my 
name is ivan ivan s childhood one nine six two winner of golden lion for best 
film at one nine six two venice film festival set in the second world war this 
is tarkovsky s most conventional feature film although it still has moments of 
lyrical beauty andrei rublev one nine six six an epic based on the life of 
andrei rublev the most famous medieval russian painter of icons solaris one 
nine seven two based on the science fiction novel by stanis aw lem mirror one 
nine seven five a loosely autobiographical reconstruction of key scenes in 
tarkovsky s life the film he d tried to make earlier but abandoned for solaris 
we can note thematic ties between them said by tarkovsky to be closest to his 
own vision of cinema stalker one nine seven nine inspired by the novel roadside 
picnic by boris and arkady strugatsky tempo di viaggio italian journey one nine 
eight two a documentary made for italian television while scouting locations 
for nostalghia with italian co writer and frequent screenwriter for 
michelangelo antonioni tonino guerra nostalghia one nine eight three a russian 
scholar retraces the footsteps of an one eight th century russian composer in 
italy an encounter with a local lunatic a man who believes he can save humanity 
by carrying a lit candle across an empty swimming pool crystalizes the poet s 
melancholic sense of longing for his family faith and homeland the sacrifice 
one nine eight six the film is about the prospect of nuclear annihilation and 
man s spiritual response to this and other dilemmas set in counterpoint to a 
minor fable of failed adultery bibliography sculpting in time reflections on 
the cinema translated by kitty hunter blair one nine eight seven time within 
time the diaries one nine seven zero one nine eight six translated by kitty 
hunter blair one nine nine three external links stalker we re now into the zone 
the one and only fan forum nostalghia com a comprehensive site about tarkovsky 
tarkovsky museum the genius of andrei tarkovsky by alan pavelin one nine three 
two births one nine eight six deaths russian actors russian and soviet film 
directors this word has many meanings d nal troddyn a treatise on language vol 
two two zero zero four a word phrase sentence or other communication is called 
ambiguous if it can be interpreted in more than one way ambiguity is distinct 
from vagueness which arises when the boundaries of meaning are indistinct 
lexical ambiguity arises when context is insufficient to determine the sense of 
a single word that has more than one meaning for example the word bank has 
several meanings including financial institution and edge of a river but if 
someone says i deposited one zero zero in the bank the intended meaning is 
clear more problematic are words whose senses express closely related concepts 
good for example can mean useful or functional that s a good hammer exemplary 
she s a good student pleasing this is good soup moral he is a good person and 
probably other similar things i have a good daughter isn t clear about which 
sense is intended syntactic ambiguity arises when a sentence can be parsed in 
more than one way he ate the cookies on the couch for example could mean that 
he ate those cookies which were on the couch as opposed to those that were on 
the table or it could mean that he was sitting on the couch when he ate the 
cookies spoken language can also contain lexical ambiguities where there is 
more than one way to break up a set of sounds into words for example ice cream 
and i scream this is rarely a problem due to the use of context philosophers 
and other users of logic spend a lot of time and effort searching for and 
removing ambiguity in arguments because it can lead to incorrect conclusions 
and can be used to deliberately conceal bad arguments for example a politician 
might say i oppose taxes which hinder economic growth some will think he 
opposes taxes in general because they hinder economic growth others will think 
he opposes only those taxes that he believes will hinder economic growth 
although in writing the correct insertion or omission of a comma after taxes 
removes ambiguity here the politician hopes that each will interpret the 
statement in the way he wants and both will think the politician is on his side 
the logical fallacies of amphiboly and equivocation also rely on the use of 
ambiguous words and phrases in literature and rhetoric on the other hand 
ambiguity can be a useful tool groucho marx s classic joke depends on a 
grammatical ambiguity for its humor for example last night i shot an elephant 
in my pajamas what he was doing in my pajamas i ll never know songs and poetry 
often rely on ambiguous words for artistic effect as in the song title don t it 
make my brown eyes blue where blue can refer to the color or to sadness in 
narrative ambiguty can be introduced in several ways motive plot character f 
scott fitzgerald uses the latter type of ambiguity with notable effect in his 
novel the great gatsby in music pieces or sections which confound expectations 
and may be or are interpreted simultaneously in different ways are ambiguous 
such as some polytonality polymeter other ambiguous meters or rhythms and 
ambiguous phrasing or stein two zero zero five p seven nine any aspect of music 
the music of africa is often purposely ambiguous to quote sir donald francis 
tovey one nine three five p one nine five theorists are apt to vex themselves 
with vain efforts to remove uncertainty just where it has a high aesthetic 
value some languages have been created with the intention of avoiding ambiguity 
especially syntactic ambiguity lojban and loglan are two nearly identical 
languages which have been created with the intention of being clear and 
impossible to misunderstand the languages can be both spoken and written their 
unambiguity makes them better suited than natural languages for use in 
communication between humans and computers see also double entendre imprecise 
language logical fallacy semantics external links collection of ambiguous or 
inconsistent incomplete statements semantics the word animal when used alone 
has several possible meanings in the english language it could refer to a 
taxonomic member of the kingdom an animal a british rock band called the 
animals an album released by british rock band pink floyd called animals a two 
zero zero one film starring rob schneider called the animal a genre of anime a 
muppet show character see dr teeth and the electric mayhem a professional 
wrestler see joseph laurinaitis a video game by microtime called animal animal 
is the name of several songs for all english languange meanings see the 
wiktionary definition of animal image erdferkel drawing jpg image width two 
zero zero px regnum animalia phylum chordata classis mammalia ordo 
tubulidentata ordo authority huxley one eight seven two familia orycteropodidae 
familia authority gray one eight two one genus orycteropus genus authority 
geoffroy saint hilaire one seven nine six species o afer binomial orycteropus 
afer binomial authority pallas one seven six six the aardvark orycteropus afer 
is a medium sized mammal native to africa the name comes from the afrikaans 
dutch for earth pig aarde earth varken pig because early settlers from europe 
thought it resembled a pig although aardvarks are not closely related to pigs 
the aardvark is the only surviving member of the family orycteropodidae and of 
the order tubulidentata the aardvark was originally placed in the same genus as 
the south american anteaters because of superficial similarities which it is 
now known are the result of convergent evolution not common ancestry for the 
same reason aardvarks bear a striking first glance resemblance to the marsupial 
bilbies and bandicoots of australasia which are not placental mammals at all 
the oldest known tubulidentata fossils have been found in kenya and date to the 
early miocene although the relationships of tubulidentata are unknown they are 
probably ungulates they spread to europe and southern asia during the later 
miocene and early pliocene periods three genera of the family orycteropodidae 
are known leptorycteropus myorycteropus and orycteropus the surviving aardvark 
a genus from madagascar may be related to them called plesiorycteropus the most 
distinctive characteristic of the tubulidentata is as the name implies their 
teeth which instead of having a pulp cavity have lots of thin tubes of dentine 
each containing pulp and held together by cementum the teeth have no enamel 
coating and are worn away and regrow continuously aardvarks are born with 
conventional incisors and canines at the front of the jaw but these fall out 
and are not replaced in adult aardvarks the only teeth are the molars at the 
back of the jaw aardvark aardvarks are only vaguely pig like the body is stout 
with an arched back the limbs are of moderate length the front feet have lost 
the pollex or thumb resulting in four toes but the rear feet have all five toes 
each toe bears a large robust nail which is somewhat flattened and shovel like 
and appears to be intermediate between a claw and a hoof the ears are 
disproportionately long and the tail very thick at the base with a gradual 
taper the greatly elongated head is set on a short thick neck and at the end of 
the snout is a disk in which the nostrils open the mouth is typical of species 
that feed on termites small and tubular aardvarks have long thin protrusible 
tongues and elaborate structures supporting a keen sense of smell weight is 
typically between four zero and six five kg length is usually between one and 
one three m aardvarks are a pale yellowish gray in color often stained reddish 
brown by soil the coat is thin and the animal s primary protection is its tough 
skin aardvarks have been known to sleep in a recently excavated ant nest so 
well does it protect them in the past several individual species of aardvark 
were named however current knowledge indicates that there is only one species 
orycteropus afer with several subspecies one eight have been listed but most 
are regarded as invalid aardvarks are nocturnal and solitary creatures that 
feed almost exclusively on ants and termites an aardvark emerges from its 
burrow in the late afternoon or shortly after sunset and forages over a 
considerable home range swinging its long nose from side to side to pick up the 
scent of food when a concentration of ants or termites is found the aardvark 
digs into it with its powerful front legs keeping its long ears upright to 
listen for predators and takes up an astonishing number of insects with its 
long sticky tongue as many as five zero zero zero zero in one night has been 
recorded they are exceptionally fast diggers but otherwise move rather slowly 
aside from digging out ants and termites aardvarks also excavate burrows to 
live in temporary sites scattered around the home range as refuges and the main 
burrow which is used for breeding main burrows can be deep and extensive have 
several entrances and be one three m long aardvarks change the layout of their 
home burrow regularly and from time to time move on and make a new one only 
mothers and young share burrows after a gestation period of seven months a 
single young weighing around two kg is born and is able to leave the burrow to 
accompany its mother after only two weeks at six months of age it is digging 
its own burrows but it will often remain with the mother until the next mating 
season aardvarks can grow older than two zero years in captivity aardvarks are 
distributed across most of sub saharan africa and although killed by humans 
both for their flesh and for their teeth which are used as decorations do not 
appear to be threatened aardvark is always the first noun in the english 
dictionary more precise information are given in a diploma thesis on the 
biology of the aardvark which can be downloaded here the biology of the 
aardvark orycteropus afer similar animals the anteaters of south america 
pangolins are also called scaly anteaters the numbat myrmecobius fasciatus a 
marsupial echidnas a family of monotremes are still sometimes called spinous 
anteaters armadillos are omnivorous but ants form a large part of their diet 
dutch loanwords mammals wildlife of africa image aardwolf png image width two 
three five px image caption aardwolf regnum animalia phylum chordata classis 
mammalia ordo carnivora familia hyaenidae genus proteles species p cristatus 
binomial proteles cristatus binomial authority sparrman one seven eight three 
the aardwolf proteles cristatus is a small mammal related to the hyena native 
to africa the name means earth wolf in afrikaans there are two subspecies 
proteles cristatus cristatus southern africa proteles cristatus septentrionalis 
east africa the aardwolf looks most like the striped hyena but smaller with a 
more pointed muzzle sharper ears vertical stripes and a long mane down the 
middle line of the neck and back it stands about five zero cm at the shoulder 
weighs around nine kg and has two glands at the rear that secrete a musky fluid 
for marking territory and communicating with other aardwolves aardwolf from the 
zoo in san antonio texas the aardwolf is nocturnal sleeping in underground 
burrows by day by night an aardwolf can consume up to two zero zero zero zero 
zero harvester termites they are also known to feed on other insects larvae and 
eggs while primarily solitary a mating pair will occupy the same territory with 
their young gestation lasts between nine zero and one zero zero days the first 
six to eight weeks are spent in the den with the mother after three months they 
begin supervised foraging and set off on their own shortly thereafter external 
links animal diversity web hyenas wildlife of africa renewal of the surface 
coating of an adobe wall in chamisal new mexico adobe is a building material 
composed of water sandy clay and straw or other organic materials which is 
shaped into bricks using wooden frames and dried in the sun also known as 
mudbrick adobe structures are extremely durable and account for the oldest 
extant buildings on the planet adobe buildings also offer significant 
advantages in hot dry climates as they remain cooler as it stores and releases 
heat very slowly the word adobe is spanish and comes from the arabic at tub the 
brick and from the coptic tobe the word may be pronounced ah doh beh or uh doh 
bee buildings made of sun dried earth are common in the middle east north 
africa and in spain usually in the mudejar style the method of brickmaking was 
imported to the americas in the one six th century by spaniards a distinction 
is sometimes made between the smaller adobes which are about the size of 
ordinary baked bricks and the larger adobines some of which are as much as from 
one to two yards long in more modern usage the term adobe has come to mean a 
style of architecture that is popular in the desert climates of north america 
especially in new mexico cf stucco detail of adobe kilns in arizona composition 
of adobe an adobe brick is made of soil mixed with water and an organic 
material such as straw or animal dung the soil composition typically contains 
clay and sand straw is useful in binding the brick together and allowing the 
brick to dry evenly dung offers the same advantage and is also added to repel 
insects adobe bricks bricks are made in an open frame two five cm one zero 
inches by three six cm one four inches is a reasonable size but any convenient 
size is fine for your own use after the mud is put into the frame the frame is 
removed after a few hours the bricks are put on edge to finish drying bricks 
should be dried in the shade to avoid cracking use the same mixture you use to 
make bricks for mortar when laying the bricks and for plaster on the interior 
and exterior walls some ancient cultures used concrete for the plaster to avoid 
rain damage it is sometimes useful to include occasional pieces of wood as you 
lay a wall to give something to nail insulation onto and stone can be used for 
additional strength the largest structure ever made from adobe bricks was the 
bam citadel which suffered serious damage up to eight zero by an earthquake on 
december two six two zero zero three other large adobe structures are the huaca 
del sol in peru built using one zero zero million signed bricks and the 
ciudellas of chan chan also in peru thermal properties because an adobe wall 
either made of bricks or using a rammed earth technique is quite massive it 
will hold heat or cold a south facing adobe wall may be left uninsulated in 
order to collect heat during the day it should be thick enough that it remains 
cool on the inside during the heat of the day but should be thin enough that 
the heat can be transferred through the wall by evening such a wall can be 
covered with glass to increase heat collection used in a passive solar home 
such a wall is called a trombe wall adobe has a large thermal mass therefore 
this type of construction is only good in tropical climates in temperate 
climates it is almost impossible to heat a home of this type as the heat is 
leached by the ground and the walls around the world image romaniadanubedelta 
makingmaterialforconstructing zero zero zero three jpg jpg still in production 
today danube delta image romaniadanubedelta makingmaterialforconstructing zero 
zero zero two jpg jpg image romaniadanubedelta makingmaterialforconstructing 
zero zero zero one jpg jpg image romaniadanubedelta 
makingmaterialforconstructing zero zero zero four jpg jpg see also hassan fathy 
mudbrick external links earth architecture a website whose focus is 
contemporary issues in earth architecture building with awareness a detailed 
how to dvd video that shows adobe wall construction and their use as thermal 
mass walls cal earth the california institute of earth art and architecture has 
developed a patented system called superadobe in which bags filled with 
stabilized earth are layered with strands of barbed wire to form a structure 
strong enough to withstand earthquakes fire and flood materials masonry arabic 
words for other uses see adventure disambiguation adventure refers to events 
which happen unexpectedly and involve the chance of danger or loss adventures 
can include daring feats remarkable occurrences stirring encounters and major 
life undertakings adventurous experiences create psychological and 
physiological arousal which can be interpreted as negative e g fear or positive 
e g flow see yerkes dodson law for some people adventure becomes a major 
pursuit in and of itself for example see extreme sports applications of 
adventure adventure is a term used in many contexts and situations for example 
it is a key component of narrative story telling drama and role playing and the 
concept is used to structure and interpet books films music and computer games 
adventure is also used within education sport tourism and others forms of 
entertainment examples of these adventure genres and applications include 
adventure education is the use of challenging experiences for learning 
adventure film is a film genre adventure game is a computer game genre 
adventure novel is a fiction genre adventure role playing games involve acting 
out a specific storyline or plotline adventure racing involves competing in 
multiple outdoor adventure extreme sports adventure tourism offers travellers 
chances to have exciting travel encounters see also risk for the queen of greek 
mythology see agave mythology agaves are succulent plants of a large botanical 
genus of the same name belonging to the family agavaceae chiefly mexican they 
occur also in the southern and western united states and in central and 
tropical south america the plants have a large rosette of thick fleshy leaves 
generally ending in a sharp point and with a spiny margin the stout stem is 
usually short the leaves apparently springing from the root each rosette is 
monocarpic and grows slowly to flower but once after a number of years when a 
tall stem or mast grows from the center of the leaf rosette and bears a large 
number of shortly tubular flowers after development of fruit the original plant 
dies but suckers are frequently produced from the base of the stem which become 
new plants swan s neck agave agave attenuata the most familiar species is agave 
americana a native of tropical america the so called century plant or american 
aloe the maguey of mexico the name refers to the long time the plant takes to 
flower although the number of years before flowering occurs depends on the 
vigor of the individual the richness of the soil and the climate during these 
years the plant is storing in its fleshy leaves the nourishment required for 
the effort of flowering during the development of the inflorescence there is a 
rush of sap to the base of the young flowerstalk in the case of a americana and 
other species this is used by the mexicans to make their national beverage 
pulque the flower shoot is cut out and the sap collected and subsequently 
fermented by distillation a spirit called mezcal is prepared the leaves of 
several species yield fiber as for instance agave rigida var sisalana sisal 
hemp agave decipiens false sisal hemp agave americana is the source of pita 
fiber and is used as a fiber plant in mexico the west indies and southern 
europe the flowering stem of the last named dried and cut in slices forms 
natural razor strops and the expressed juice of the leaves will lather in water 
like soap the native americans of mexico used the agave both to make pens nails 
and needles as well as string to sew and make weavings in india the plant is 
extensively used for hedges along railroads agave in bloom in a garden 
roquevaire bouches du rh ne france september one nine seven eight agave 
americana century plant was introduced into europe about the middle of the one 
six th century and is now widely cultivated for its handsome appearance in the 
variegated forms the leaf has a white or yellow marginal or central stripe from 
base to apex as the leaves unfold from the center of the rosette the impression 
of the marginal spines is very conspicuous on the still erect younger leaves 
the tequ plants are usually grown in tubs and put out in the summer months but 
in the winter require protection from frost they mature very slowly and die 
after flowering but are easily propagated by the offsets from the base of the 
stem agave nectar has been used as an alternative to sugar in cooking the juice 
from many species of agave can cause acute contact dermatitis it will produce 
reddening and blistering lasting one to two weeks episodes of itching may recur 
up to a year thereafter even though there is no longer a visible rash 
interestingly dried parts of the plants can be handled with bare hands with 
little or no effect taxonomy agaves were once classified in liliaceae but most 
references now include them in their own family agavaceae agaves have long 
presented special difficulties for taxonomy variations within a species may be 
considerable and a number of named species are of unknown origin and may just 
be variants of original wild species spanish and portuguese explorers probably 
brought agaves back with them but really became popular in europe during the 
one nine th century with many types being imported by collectors some of have 
been continuously propagated by offset since then and do not consistently 
resemble any species known in nature although this may simply be due to the 
unnatural growing conditions in europe species agave aboriginum agave abortiva 
agave abrupta agave acicularis agave acklinicola agave affinis agave 
lecheguilla agave ajoensis agave schottii var schottii agave deserti var 
simplex agave aktites agave albescens agave albomarginata agave alibertii agave 
aloides agave amaniensis agave americana l american agave american century 
plant century plant maguey americano agave americana var americana agave 
americana var expansa agave americana var latifolia agave americana var 
marginata agave americana var medio picta agave americana var oaxacensis agave 
americana var striata agave americana ssp protamericana tequila agave agave 
tequilana agave angustiarum agave angustifolia haw century plant maguey espad n 
agave angustissima agave anomala agave antillarum agave antillarum var 
grammontensis agave applanata agave arizonica gentry arizona agave arizona 
century plant agave arubensis agave aspera agave asperrima jacobi maguey spero 
rough century plant agave attenuata swan s neck agave dragon tree agave foxtail 
agave agave aurea agave horrida agave avellanidens agave bahamana agave bakeri 
agave banlan agave barbadensis agave baxteri agave bergeri agave bernhardi 
agave boldinghiana agave bollii agave botterii agave bouchei agave bourgaei 
agave bovicornuta cowhorn agave agave braceana agave brachystachys agave 
bracteosa squid agave agave brandegeei agave brauniana agave breedlovei agave 
brevipetala agave breviscapa agave brevispina agave brittonia agave 
bromeliaefolia agave brunnea agave bulbifera agave cacozela agave cajalbanensis 
agave calderoni agave calodonta agave campanulata agave cantala roxb cantala 
maguey de la india supplies manila maquey fiber agave capensis agave agave 
carchariodonta agave caribaea agave caribiicola agave carminis agave caroli 
schmidtii agave celsii agave cernua agave cerulata agave cerulata ssp 
subcerulata agave chiapensis syn agave polyacantha agave chihuahuana agave 
chinensis agave chisosensis agave chloracantha agave chrysantha peebles golden 
flowered agave golden flower century plant agave chrysoglossa agave coccinea 
agave cocui agave coespitosa agave colimana agave collina agave colorata mescal 
ceniza agave compacta agave complicata agave compluviata agave concinna agave 
congesta agave conjuncta agave connochaetodon agave consociata agave convallis 
agave corderoyi agave costaricana agave cucullata agave cundinamarcensis agave 
cupreata agave dasyliriodes agave datylio agave davilloni agave de meesteriana 
agave dealbata agave deamiana agave debilis agave decaisneana agave decipiens 
baker false sisal agave delamateri w c hodgson desert century plant desert 
agave maguey de desierto agave deserti ssp simplex agave desmettiana jacobi 
dwarf century plant smooth agave syn a miradorensis agave diacantha agave 
difformis agave disceptata agave disjuncta agave dissimulans agave donnell 
smithii agave durangensis agave dussiana agave eborispina agave eduardi agave 
eggersiana trel eggers century plant st croix agave agave ehrenbergii agave 
eichlami agave ekmani agave elizae agave ellemeetiana agave endlichiana agave 
engelmanni agave entea agave erosa agave evadens agave excelsa agave expatriata 
agave falcata agave falcata var espadina agave falcata var microcarpa agave 
felgeri mescalito agave felina agave fenzliana agave ferdinandi regis agave 
filifera thread leaf agave agave filifera subsp microceps agave flaccida agave 
flaccifolia agave flavovirens agave flexispina agave fortiflora agave 
fourcroydes lemaire henequen maguey henequen mexican sisal supplies henequen 
fiber agave fourcroydes var espiculata agave fragrantissima agave franceschiana 
agave franzosini agave friderici agave funifera agave funkiana ixtle de jaumave 
syn agave lophanta agave galeottei agave garciae mendozae agave geminiflora 
agave geminiflora var filifera agave gentryi agave ghiesbrechtii agave glabra 
agave glaucescens agave goeppertiana agave glomeruliflora engelm berger chisos 
mountain century plant maguey del bravo agave gracilipes trel maguey de 
pastizal slimfoot century plant agave gracilis agave grandibracteata agave 
granulosa agave grenadina agave grijalvensis agave grisea agave guadalajarana 
maguey chato agave guatemalensis agave guedeneyri agave guiengola agave 
gutierreziana agave guttata agave gypsophila agave hanburii agave harrisii 
agave hartmani agave haseloffii agave hauniensis agave havardiana trel havard s 
century plant chisos agave maguey de havard agave haynaldi agave henriquesii 
agave hexapetala agave hiemiflora agave hookeri agave horizontalis agave 
horrida agave houghii agave huachucaensis agave huehueteca agave humboldtiana 
agave hurteri agave impressa agave inaequidens agave inaguensis agave 
indagatorum agave ingens agave inopinabilis agave integrifolia agave intermixta 
agave intrepida agave isthmensis agave jaiboli agave jarucoensis agave karatto 
agave kellermaniana agave kerchovei agave kewensis agave kirchneriana agave 
lagunae agave langlassei agave laticincta agave latifolia agave laurentiana 
agave laxa agave laxifolia agave lecheguilla torr agave lechuguilla lecheguilla 
lechuguilla maguey lechuguilla syn agave heteracantha agave lemairei agave 
lempana agave lespinassei agave lindleyi agave littaeaoides agave longipes 
agave longisepala agave lophantha schiede maguey mezortillo thorncrest century 
plant agave lurida agave macrantha agave macroculmis agave gentryi hardy 
century plant agave maculata agave madagascariensis agave mapisaga agave 
margaritae agave marmorata agave martiana agave maximiliana agave 
maximowicziana agave mayoensis agave mckelveyana gentry mckelvey agave mckelvey 
s century plant agave medioxima agave megalacantha agave melanacantha agave 
melliflua agave mexicana agave micracantha agave millspaughii agave minarum 
