agave mirabilis agave missionum trel corita agave mitis agave monostachya agave 
montana agave montserratensis agave moranii agave morrisii agave muilmanni 
agave mulfordiana agave multifilifera agave multiflora agave multilineata agave 
murpheyi f gibson maguey bandeado murphey agave murphey s century plant hohokam 
agave agave nashii agave nayaritensis agave neglecta small wild century plant 
agave nelsoni agave nevadensis agave nevidis agave newberyi agave nickelsi 
agave nissoni agave nizandensis dwarf octopus agave agave noli tangere agave 
obducta agave oblongata agave obscura agave ocahui agave ocahui var longifolia 
agave offoyana agave oligophylla agave oliverana agave opacidens agave 
orcuttiana agave ornithobroma maguey pajarito agave oroensis agave ovatifolia 
agave oweni agave pachyacantha agave pachycentra agave pacifica agave pallida 
agave palmaris agave palmeri engelm maguey de tlalcoyote palmer agave palmer 
century plant palmer s century plant agave pampaniniana agave panamana agave 
papyriocarpa agave parryi engelm mezcal yapavai parry agave parry s agave agave 
parryi var truncata agave parvidentata agave parviflora torr maguey sbari 
smallflower agave smallflower century plant little princess agave agave 
parviflora subsp flexiflora agave patonii agave paucifolia agave paupera agave 
pavoliniana agave peacockii agave pedrosana agave pedunculifera agave pelona 
bald agave agave perplexans agave pes mulae agave petiolata agave petrophila 
agave phillipsiana agave picta agave planera agave polianthiflora agave 
polianthoides agave portoricensis trel puerto rico century plant agave 
potatorum drunkard agaveagave potatorum at kew gardens london england agave 
potosina agave potrerana agave prainiana agave promontorii agave prostrata 
agave protuberans agave pruinosa agave pseudotequilana agave pugioniformis 
agave pulcherrima agave pulchra agave pumila agave punctata agave purpurea 
agave purpusorum agave pygmae agave quadrata agave quiotifera agave ragusae 
agave rasconensis agave regia agave revoluta agave rhodacantha agave rigida 
agave roezliana agave rudis agave rupicola agave rupicola var brevifolia agave 
rupicola var longifolia agave rupicola var rubridentata agave rutteniae agave 
rzedowskiana agave salmdyckii agave salmiana pulque maguey maguey de monta a 
syn agave atrovirens agave salmiana var angustifolia agave salmiana var 
cochlearis agave samalana agave sartorii agave scaphoidea agave scaposa agave 
scheuermaniana agave schildigera agave schneideriana agave schottii engelm 
maguey puercoesp n schott agave schott s century plant shindagger leather agave 
agave schottii var serrulata agave scolymus agave scolymus var polymorpha agave 
sebastiana agave seemanniana agave seemanniana var perscabra agave serrulata 
agave sessiliflora agave shaferi agave shawii engelm coastal agave maguey 
primavera agave shrevei agave shrevei ssp magna agave shrevei ssp matapensis 
agave sicaefolia agave simoni agave sisalana perrine maguey de sisal sisal 
sisal hemp syn furcraea sisaliana agave sleviniana agave smithiana agave 
sobolifera agave sobolifera f spinidentata agave sobria agave sobria ssp 
frailensis agave sordida agave striata agave striata var mesae agave stricta 
agave stringens agave subinermis agave subsimplex agave subtilis agave 
subzonata agave sullivani agave tecta agave tenuifolia agave tenuispina agave 
teopiscana agave tequilana a weber mezcal azul tequilero tequila agave weber 
blue agave gives tequila agave terraccianoi agave theometel agave thomasae 
agave thomsoniana agave tigrina agave titanota agave todaroi agave toneliana 
agave tortispina agave toumeyana trel toumey agave toumey s century plant agave 
toumeyana var bella agave trankeera agave troubetskoyana agave tubulata agave 
tubulata ssp brevituba agave underwoodii agave unguiculata agave utahensis 
engelm utah agave agave utahensis var discreta agave van grolae agave 
vandervinneni agave ventum versa agave vernae agave verschaffeltii agave 
vestita agave vicina agave victoriae reginae queen victoria s agave agave 
victoriae reginae f dentata agave victoriae reginae f latifolia agave victoriae 
reginae f longifolia agave victoriae reginae f longispina agave victoriae 
reginae f ornata agave victoriae reginae f stolonifera agave victoriae reginae 
f viridis agave victoriae reginae ssp swobodae agave vilmoriniana berger 
octopus agave agave viridissima agave vivipara agave vivipara var cabaiensis 
agave vivipara var cuebensis agave vizcainoensis agave wallisii agave 
warelliana agave washingtonensis agave watsoni agave weberi cels ex poisson 
maguey liso weber s century plant weber agave agave weingartii agave wendtii 
agave wercklei agave wiesenbergensis agave wightii agave wildingii agave 
winteriana agave wislizeni agave parrasana synonym agave wislizeni agave 
wocomahi agave woodrowi agave wrightii agave xylonacantha salm dyck century 
plant maguey diente de tiburn agave yaquiana agave yuccaefolia agave yuccifolia 
var caespitosa agave zapupe agave zebra agave zonata agave zuccarinii 
references howard scott gentry agaves of continental north america university 
of arizona press one nine eight two the standard work with accounts of one 
three six species ipni the international plant name index external links desert 
tropicals agave list agave nectar or syrup agave virginica false aloe king s 
american dispensatory henriette s herbal botanical dermatology database 
information on agave contact dermatitis agavaceae poisonous plants dermatology 
asia is the largest and most populous region or continent depending on the 
definition it is traditionally defined as part of the landmass of africa 
eurasia lying east of the suez canal east of the ural mountains and south of 
the caucasus mountains and the caspian and black seas about six zero of the 
world s human population lives in asia of whom only two live in the northern 
and interior half siberia mongolia kazakhstan xinjiang tibet qinghai western 
uzbekistan and turkmenistan the other nine eight live in the remaining half 
world map showing asia etymology the word asia entered english via latin from 
ancient greek asia see also list of traditional greek place names this name is 
first attested in herodotus c four four zero bc where it refers to asia minor 
or for the purposes of describing the persian wars to the persian empire as 
opposed to greece and egypt herodotus comments that he is puzzled as to why 
three different women s names are used to describe a single land mass europa 
asia and libya referring to africa stating that most greeks assumed that asia 
was named after the wife of prometheus but that the lydians say it was named 
after asias son of cotys who passed the name on to a tribe in sardis even 
before herodotus homer knew of a trojan ally named asios son of hyrtacus a 
ruler over several towns and elsewhere he describes a marsh as iliad two four 
six one the greek term may be derived from assuwa a one four th century bc 
confederation of states in western anatolia hittite assu good is probably an 
element in that name alternatively the ultimate etymology of the term may be 
from the akkadian word w a m cognate of hebrew which means to go out or to 
ascend referring to the direction of the sun at sunrise in the middle east and 
also likely connected with the phoenician word asa meaning east this may be 
contrasted to a similar etymology proposed for europe as being from semitic er 
bu to enter or set of the sun however an originally mesopotamian or middle 
eastern perspective would not explain how the term asia first came to be 
associated with anatolia as lying west of the semitic speaking area definition 
and boundaries political map of asia medieval europeans considered asia as a 
continent a distinct landmass the european concept of the three continents in 
the old world goes back to classical antiquity with the etymology of the word 
rooted in the ancient near and middle east the demarcation between asia and 
africa is the isthmus of suez and the red sea the boundary between asia and 
europe is commonly believed to run through the dardanelles the sea of marmara 
the bosporus the black sea the caucasus mountains the caspian sea the ural 
river to its source and the ural mountains to the kara sea near kara russia 
however modern discovery of the extent of africa and asia made this definition 
rather anachronistic especially in the case of asia which would have several 
regions that would be considered distinct landmasses if these criteria were 
used for example south asia and east asia geologists and physical geographers 
no longer consider asia and europe to be separate continents it is either 
defined in terms of geological landmasses physical geography or tectonic plates 
geology in the former case europe is a western peninsula of eurasia or the 
africa eurasia landmass in the latter europe and asia are still part of the 
eurasian plate which excludes the arabian and indian tectonic plates in human 
geography there are two schools of thought one school follows historical 
convention and treats europe and asia as different continents categorizing 
europe east asia the orient south asia british india and the middle east arabia 
and persia as specific regions for more detailed analysis the other schools 
equate the word continent in terms of geographical region when referring to 
europe and use the term region to describe asia in terms of physical geography 
because in linguistic terms continent implies a distinct landmass it is 
becoming increasingly common to substitute the term region for continent to 
avoid the problem of disambiguation altogether there is much confusion in 
european languages with the term asian because a category implies homogenity 
the term asian almost always refers to a subcategory of people from asia rather 
than referring to asian defined in term of asia the fact that in american 
english asian refers to east asian orientals while in british english asian 
refers to south asian reflects this confusion sometimes it is not even clear 
exactly what asia consists of some definitions exclude turkey the middle east 
and or russia the term is sometimes used more strictly in reference to asia 
pacific which does not include the middle east or russia but does include 
islands in the pacific ocean a number of which may also be considered part of 
australasia and or oceania asia contains the indian subcontinent arabian 
subcontinent as well as a piece of the north american plate in siberia 
geographical regions satellite view of asia as already mentioned asia is a 
subregion of eurasia for further subdivisions based on that term see north 
eurasia and central eurasia some asian countries stretch beyond asia see 
bicontinental country for details about the borderline cases between asia and 
europe asia and africa and asia and oceania the following subregions of asia 
are traditionally recognized central asia east asia far east north asia south 
asia or indian subcontinent southeast asia southwest asia or middle east or 
west asia central asia there is no absolute consensus in the usage of this term 
usually central asia includes the central asian republics of kazakhstan 
excluding its small european territory uzbekistan tajikistan turkmenistan and 
kyrgyzstan afghanistan mongolia and the western regions of china are also 
sometimes included former soviet states in the caucasus region central asia is 
currently geopolitically important because international disputes and conflicts 
over oil pipelines nagorno karabakh and chechnya as well as the presence of u s 
military and u k military forces in afghanistan east asia this area includes 
the pacific ocean island countries of taiwan and japan north and south korea on 
the korean peninsula china but sometimes only the eastern regions sometimes the 
nations of mongolia and vietnam are also included in east asia more informally 
southeast asia is included in east asia on some occasions north asia this term 
is rarely used by geographers but usually it refers to the bigger asian part of 
russia also known as siberia sometimes the northern parts of other asian 
nations such as kazakhstan are also included in northern asia south asia or 
indian subcontinent south asia is also referred to as the indian subcontinent 
it includes the himalayan states of india pakistan nepal bhutan and bangladesh 
the indian ocean nations of sri lanka and the maldives india s andaman nicobar 
and lakshadweep islands also lie in the indian ocean the peninsular india also 
known as the deccan plateau sometimes afghanistan is also included into this 
category southeast asia this region contains the malay peninsula indochina and 
islands in the indian ocean and pacific ocean the countries it contains are in 
mainland southeast asia the countries myanmar thailand laos cambodia and 
vietnam in maritime southeast asia the countries of malaysia brunei the 
philippines singapore and indonesia some of the indonesian islands also lie in 
the melanesia region of oceania east timor also melanesian is sometimes 
included too the country of malaysia is divided in two by the south china sea 
and thus has both a mainland and island part southwest asia or middle east near 
east or west asia this can also be called by the western term middle east which 
is commonly used by europeans and americans middle east to some interpretations 
is often used to also refer to some countries in north africa southwest asia 
can be further divided into anatolia i e asia minor constituting the asian part 
of turkey the island nation of cyprus in the mediterranean sea the levant or 
near east which includes syria israel jordan lebanon iraq and the asian portion 
of egypt the arabian peninsula including saudi arabia united arab emirates 
bahrain qatar oman yemen and kuwait the caucasus region which straddles both 
asia and europe namely transcaucasia including a small portion of russia and 
arguably most if not all of georgia armenia and azerbaijan the iranian plateau 
containing iran and parts of other neighbouring nations economy in terms of 
gross domestic product ppp the largest national economy within asia is that of 
the prc people s republic of china over the last decade china s and india s 
economies have been growing rapidly both with an average annual growth rate 
above seven prc is the world s second largest economy after the us followed by 
japan and india as the world s third and fourth largest economies respectively 
then followed by the european nations germany u k france and italy in terms of 
exchange rates nominal gdp however japan has the largest economy in asia and 
second largest of any single nation in the world after surpassing the soviet 
union measured in net material product in one nine eight six and germany in one 
nine six eight nb a number of supernational economies are larger such as the eu 
nafta or apec economic growth in asia since world war ii to the one nine nine 
zero s had been concentrated in few countries of the pacific rim and has spread 
more recently to other regions in the late eight zero s and early nine zero s 
japan s economy was almost as large as that of the rest of the continent 
combined in one nine nine five japan s economy nearly equalled the usa to tie 
the largest economy in the world for a day after the japanese currency reached 
a record high of seven nine yen however since then japan s currency has 
corrected and china has grown to be the second largest asian economy followed 
by india in terms of exchange rates it is expected that china will surpass 
japan in currency terms to have the largest nominal gdp in asia within a decade 
or two trade blocs asia pacific economic cooperation asia europe economic 
meeting association of southeast asian nations closer economic partnership 
arrangement commonwealth of independent states south asian association for 
regional cooperation south asia free trade agreement proposed natural resources 
asia is by a considerable margin the largest continent in the world and is rich 
in natural resources such as petroleum and iron high productivity in 
agriculture especially of rice allows high population density of countries in 
the warm and humid area other main agricultural products include wheat and 
chicken forestry is extensive throughout asia except southwest and central asia 
fishing is a major source of food in asia particularly in japan manufacturing 
manufacturing in asia has traditionally been strongest in east and southeast 
asia particularly in prc taiwan japan south korea and singapore the industry 
varies from manufacturing cheap goods such as toys to high tech goods such as 
computers and cars many companies from europe north america and japan have 
significant operations in the developing asia to take avantage of its abundant 
supply of cheap labor one of the major employers in manufacturing in asia is 
the textile industry much of the world s supply of clothing and footwear now 
originates in southeast asia financial and other services asia has three main 
financial centers they are in hong kong singapore and tokyo call centers are 
becoming major employers in india and the philippines due to the availablity of 
many well educated english speakers the rise of the business process 
outsourcing industry has seen the rise of india and china as the other 
financial centers early history map of asia one eight nine two the history of 
asia can be seen as the distinct histories of several peripheral coastal 
regions linked by the interior mass of the central asian steppe the coastal 
periphery was home to some of the world s earliest known civilizations each of 
them developing around fertile river valleys the civilizations in mesopotamia 
the indus valley and the yangtze shared many similarities and may well have 
exchanged technologies and ideas such as mathematics and the wheel other 
innovations such as that of writing seem to have been developed individually in 
each area cities states and empires developed in these lowlands the central 
steppe region had long been inhabited by horse mounted nomads and from the 
steppes they could reach all areas of asia the earliest postulated expansion 
out of the steppe is that of the indo europeans who spread their languages into 
the middle east india and in the tocharians to the borders of china the 
northernmost part of asia including much of siberia was largely inaccessible to 
the steppe nomads owing to the dense forests the climate and the tundra these 
areas remained very sparsely populated the centre and the peripheries were 
mostly kept separated by mountains and deserts the caucasus and himalaya 
mountains and the karakum and gobi deserts formed barriers that the steppe 
horsemen could cross only with difficulty while technologically and socially 
the urban city dwellers were more advanced in many cases they could do little 
militarily to defend against the mounted hordes of the steppe however the 
lowlands did not have enough open grasslands to support a large horsebound 
force for this and other reasons the nomads who conquered states in china india 
and the middle east often found themselves adapting to the local more affluent 
societies population density the following table lists countries and 
dependencies by population density in inhabitants and km two unlike the figures 
in the country articles the figures in this table are based on areas including 
inland water bodies lakes reservoirs rivers and may therefore be lower here the 
whole of egypt russia kazakhstan georgia azerbaijan and turkey are referred to 
in the table although they may be considered to be only partly in asia asia 
also contains about six zero of the world s population leaving the other four 
zero of the world s population to other continents religion a large majority of 
people in the world who practice a religious faith practice one founded in asia 
religions founded in asia and with a majority of their contemporary adherents 
in asia include bah faith slightly more than half of all adherents are in asia 
buddhism cambodia china japan korea laos mongolia myanmar singapore sri lanka 
thailand vietnam parts of northern eastern and western india and parts of 
central and eastern russia siberia mahayana buddhism china japan korea 
singapore vietnam theravada buddhism cambodia parts of china laos myanmar sri 
lanka thailand as well as parts of vietnam vajrayana buddhism parts of china 
mongolia parts of northern and eastern india parts of central eastern russia 
and siberia hinduism india nepal bangladesh sri lanka pakistan malaysia 
singapore bali islam central south and southwest asia malaysia philippines 
brunei and indonesia shia islam largely to specific iran azerbaijan parts of 
iraq bahrain parts of afghanistan parts of india parts of pakistan sunni islam 
dominant in the rest of the regions mentioned above jainism india qadiani 
pakistan bangladesh india shinto japan sikhism india malaysia hong kong daoism 
china korea vietnam singapore and taiwan zoroastrianism iran india pakistan 
shamanism siberia animism eastern india religions founded in asia that have the 
majority of their contemporary adherents in other regions include christianity 
lebanon syria palestine armenia georgia south korea singapore malaysia 
indonesia east timor pakistan india and the philippines judaism slightly fewer 
than half of its adherents reside in asia israel iran india syria see also 
assuwa asia minor pan asianism references external links http www lib utexas 
edu maps asia html http www freeworldmaps net asia index html asia continents 
align center colspan two national motto one happy island align center colspan 
two location of aruba official language dutch political status dependent area 
of the netherlands capital oranjestad queen beatrix governor fredis refunjol 
prime minister nelson o oduber area total water not ranked one eight zero km 
negligible population total two zero zero four est density ranked one eight 
seven one zero three zero zero zero two zero zero four three six three km 
currency aruban florin time zone utc four national anthem aruba dushi tera 
internet tld aw calling code two nine seven aruba is an island in the caribbean 
sea just a short distance north of the venezuelan paraguan peninsula and it 
forms a part of the kingdom of the netherlands unlike much of the caribbean 
region it has a dry climate and an arid cactus strewn landscape this climate 
has helped tourism however as visitors to the island can reliably expect warm 
sunny weather history main article history of aruba discovered and claimed for 
spain in one four nine nine aruba was acquired by the dutch in one six three 
six the island s economy has been dominated by three main industries a one nine 
th century gold rush was followed by prosperity brought on by the opening in 
one nine two four of an oil refinery the last decades of the two zero th 
century saw a boom in the tourism industry aruba seceded from the netherlands 
antilles on january one one nine eight six and became a separate self governing 
member of the kingdom of the netherlands movement toward full independence by 
one nine nine six was halted at aruba s request in one nine nine zero politics 
main article politics of aruba aruba is a part of the kingdom of the 
netherlands but maintains full control over its own affairs except for issues 
dealing with national defence citizenship foreign affairs and extradition aruba 
has its own laws constitution government and currency the aruban head of state 
is the ruling monarch of the netherlands who is represented in aruba by a 
governor appointed for a six year term the head of government is the prime 
minister who forms together with the council of ministers the executive branch 
of the government they are elected by the parliament the unicameral legislature 
or staten which holds two one seats members are elected by direct popular vote 
to serve four year terms geography main article geography of aruba aruba is a 
generally flat riverless island renowned for its white sand beaches most of 
these are located on the western and southern coasts of the island which are 
relatively sheltered from fierce ocean currents the northern and eastern coasts 
lacking this protection are considerably more battered by the sea and have been 
left largely untouched by humans the interior of the island features some 
rolling hills the better two of which are called hooiberg at one six five 
metres five four one ft and mount jamanota which is the highest on the island 
at one eight eight metres six one seven ft above sea level oranjestad the 
capital is located at as a separate member state of the kingdom of the 
netherlands the island state has no administrative subdivisions on the east are 
cura ao and bonaire two island territories which form the southwest part of the 
netherlands antilles aruba and these two netherlands antilles islands are also 
known as the abc islands the local climate is a pleasant tropical marine 
climate little seasonal temperature variation exists which helps aruba to 
attract tourists all year round temperatures are almost constant at about two 
eight c eight two f moderated by constant trade winds from the atlantic ocean 
yearly precipitation barely reaches five zero zero mm two zero in most of it 
falling in late autumn map of aruba with cities economy main article economy of 
aruba aruba enjoys one of the highest standards of living in the caribbean 
region with low poverty and unemployment rates about half of the aruban gross 
national product is earned with tourism or related activities most of the 
tourists are from canada the european union and other places notably the united 
states which is the country s largest trading partner oil processing is the 
dominant industry in aruba despite expansion of the tourism sector the size of 
the agriculture and manufacturing industries remains minimal deficit spending 
has been a staple in aruba s history and modestly high inflation has been 
present as well although recent efforts at tightening monetary policy may 
correct this aruba receives some development aid from the dutch government each 
year the aruban guilder has a fixed exchange rate with the united states dollar 
of one seven nine one demographics population of aruba data of fao year two 
zero zero five number of inhabitants in thousands having poor soil and aridity 
aruba was saved from plantation economics and the slave trade in one five one 
five the spanish transported the entire population to hispaniola to work in the 
copper mines most were allowed to return when the mines were tapped out the 
dutch who took control a century later left the arawaks to graze livestock 
using the island as a source of meat for other dutch possessions in the 
caribbean the arawak heritage is stronger on aruba than on most caribbean 
islands no full blooded indians remain but the features of the islanders 
clearly indicate their genetic heritage the majority of the population is 
descended from arawak dutch and spanish ancestors recently there has been 
substantial immigration to the island from neighboring latin american and 
caribbean nations attracted by the lure of well paying jobs the two official 
languages are the dutch language and the predominant national language 
papiamento which is classified as a creole language this creole language is 
formed primarily from one six th century portuguese and several other languages 
spanish and english are also spoken islanders can often speak four or more 
languages and are mostly roman catholic population one zero three zero zero 
zero april two zero zero four est age structure zero one four years two zero 
seven male seven five four zero female seven one two one one five six four 
years six eight three male two three four two seven female two four nine five 
five six five years and over one one male three two one five female four five 
eight six two zero zero three est median age total three seven one years male 
three five three years female three eight five years two zero zero two 
population growth rate zero five five two zero zero three est birth rate one 
one eight six births one zero zero zero population two zero zero three est 
death rate six three eight deaths one zero zero zero population two zero zero 
three est net migration rate zero migrant s one zero zero zero population two 
zero zero three est sex ratio at birth one zero five male s female under one 
five years one zero six male s female one five six four years zero nine four 
male s female six five years and over zero seven male s female total population 
zero nine three male s female two zero zero three est infant mortality rate 
total six one four deaths one zero zero zero live births female five two five 
deaths one zero zero zero live births two zero zero three est male six nine 
nine deaths one zero zero zero live births life expectancy at birth total 
population seven eight eight three years male seven five four eight years 
female eight two three four years two zero zero three est total fertility rate 
one seven nine children born woman two zero zero three est nationality noun 
aruban s adjective aruban dutch religions roman catholic eight two protestant 
eight hindu muslim confucian jewish languages dutch official papiamento 
national language spanish english culture main article culture of aruba the 
origins of the population and location of the island give aruba a mixed culture 
dutch influence can still be seen even though not much of the population is of 
dutch origin tourism from the united states has recently also increased the 
visibility of american culture on the island queen beatrix international 
airport located near oranjestad aruba currently serves the whole island of 
aruba this airport has access to various cities across the eastern u s from 
miami orlando houston atlanta to new york it also connects aruba with europe 
through the schiphol airport in the netherlands the holiday of carnival is an 
important one in aruba as it is in many caribbean and latin american countries 
carnival is usually held from the beginning of january until the end of 
february with a large parade on the final sunday of the festivities see also 
music of aruba and the netherlands antilles language language can be seen as an 
important part of island culture in aruba the cultural mixture has given way to 
a linguistic mixture known as papiamento however islanders are known to speak 
many languages islanders often speak papiamento english dutch and spanish in 
recent years the government of aruba has shown an increased interest in 
acknowledging the cultural and historical importance of its native language 
places of interest alto vista chapel arikok national park ayo and casibari rock 
formations california lighthouse frenchman s pass hooiberg lourdes grotto 
natural bridge collapsed on september two two zero zero five natural pool palm 
and eagle beaches miscellaneous topics communications in aruba foreign 
relations of aruba transportation in aruba military of aruba external links 
aruba com official governmental portal aruba hotels and travel info 
arubatourism com the original website for aruba visitors established in one 
nine nine six library of congress portals on the world aruba cia the world 
factbook aruba cia world factbook on aruba an island map of aruba and a 
detailed map of oranjestad are available at caribbean on line com aruba travel 
forums aruba message board visit aruba travel forums aruba message board photos 
pictures of aruba aruba airport authority free aruba ecards cbaruba org the 
official central bank of aruba aruba aloe aruba bound n v elmar aruba s 
electric utility aruba guide the definitive aruba vacation guide aruba 
caribbean islands special territories of the european union the articles of 
confederation the articles of confederation and perpetual union commonly known 
as the articles of confederation was the first governing document of the united 
states of america the articles which combined the one three colonies of the 
american revolutionary war into a loose confederation were adopted by the 
second continental congress on november one five one seven seven seven after 
one six months of debate the articles were ratified three years later on march 
one one seven eight one the articles were eventually replaced by the united 
states constitution on june two one one seven eight eight when the ninth state 
new hampshire ratified the constitution according to their own terms for 
modification however the articles were still in effect until one seven nine 
zero when every one of the one three states had ratified the new constitution 
ratification the articles of confederation were submitted to the states for 
ratification on november one seven one seven seven seven accompanied by a 
letter from congress urging that the document be candidly reviewed under a 
sense of the difficulty of combining in one general system the various 
sentiments and interests of a continent divided into so many sovereign and 
independent communities under a conviction of the absolute necessity of uniting 
all our councils and all our strength to maintain and defend our common 
liberties the document only became effective as it was ratified by the states 
this process dragged on for several years stalled by an interstate quarrel over 
claims to uncolonized land in the west maryland was the last hold out it 
refused to ratify until virginia and new york agreed to rescind their claims to 
lands in the ohio river valley all of the colonies rebelling against britain 
ratified it by one seven eight one although congress debated the articles for 
over a year it requested immediate action on the part of the states on february 
five one seven seven eight south carolina became the first state to ratify the 
articles of confederation however three and a half years passed before the 
final ratification by maryland on march one one seven eight one article 
summaries even though the articles of confederation and the constitution were 
established by much of the same people they were still very different the 
document contained one three articles a conclusion and a signatory section 
establishes the name of the confederation as the united states of america 
explains the rights possessed by any state and the amount of power to which any 
state is entitled establishes the united states as a league of states united 
for their common defense the security of their liberties and their mutual and 
general welfare binding themselves to assist each other against all force 
offered to or attacks made upon them establishes freedom of movement anyone can 
pass freely between states excluding paupers vagabonds and fugitives from 
justice excepted all people are entitled to the rights established by the state 
into which he or she travels if a crime is committed in one state and the 
perpetrator flees to another state he will be extradited to and tried in the 
state in which the crime was committed allocates one vote in the congress of 
the confederation united states in congress assembled to each state which was 
entitled to a delegation of between two and seven members members of congress 
were appointed by state legislatures individuals could not serve more than 
three out of any six years limits the powers of states to conduct foreign 
relations and to declare war when an army is raised for common defense colonels 
and military ranks below colonel will be named by the state legislatures 
expenditures by the united states will be paid by funds raised by state 
legislatures and apportioned to the states based on the real property values of 
each defines the rights of the central government to declare war to set weights 
and measures including coins and for congress to serve as a final court for 
disputes between states defines a committee of the states to be a government 
when congress is not in session requires nine states to approve the admission 
of a new state into the confederacy preapproves canada if they apply for 
membership reaffirms that the confederation accepts war debt incurred by 
congress before the articles assumption declares that the articles are 
perpetual and can only be altered by approval of congress with ratification by 
all the state legislatures still at war with the kingdom of great britain the 
colonists were reluctant to establish another powerful national government 
jealously guarding their new independence the continental congress created a 
loosely structured unicameral legislature that protected the liberty of the 
individual states at the expense of the confederation while calling on congress 
to regulate military and monetary affairs for example the articles of 
confederation provided no mechanism to ensure states complied with requests for 
troops or revenue at times this left the military in a precarious position as 
george washington wrote in a one seven eight one letter to the governor of 
massachusetts john hancock the end of the war the treaty of paris one seven 
eight three ending hostilities with great britain languished in congress for 
months because state representatives failed to attend sessions of the national 
legislature yet congress had no power to enforce attendance writing to george 
clinton in september one seven eight three george washington complained 
congress have come to no determination yet respecting the peace establishment 
nor am i able to say when they will i have lately had a conference with a 
committee on this subject and have reiterated my former opinions but it appears 
to me that there is not a sufficient representation to discuss great national 
points function the articles supported the congressional direction of the 
continental army and allowed the thirteen colonies to present a unified front 
when dealing with the european powers but as an instrument of government they 
were largely a failure congress could make decisions but had no power to 
enforce them perhaps the most important power that congress was denied was the 
power of taxation congress could only request money from the states 
understandably the states did not generally comply with the requests in full 
leaving the confederation chronically short of funds the states and the 
national congress had both incurred debts during the war and paying 
congressional debts became a major issue nevertheless the continental congress 
did take two actions with lasting impact the land ordinance of one seven eight 
five established the general land survey and ownership provisions used 
throughout later american expansion the northwest ordinance of one seven eight 
seven noted the agreement of the original states to give up western land claims 
and cleared the way for the entry of new states once the unity demanded by the 
revolutionary war became unnecessary the continental army was largely disbanded 
a very small national force was maintained to man frontier forts and protect 
against indian attacks meanwhile each of the states had an army or militia and 
one one of them had navies the wartime promises of bounties and land grants to 
be paid for service were not being met in one seven eight three washington 
defused the newburgh conspiracy but riots by unpaid pennsylvania veterans 
forced the congress to leave philadelphia on june two one revision in may one 
seven eight six charles pinckney of south carolina proposed that congress 
revise the articles of confederation recommended changes included granting 
congress power over foreign and domestic commerce and providing means for 
congress to collect money from state treasuries unanimous approval was 
necessary to make the alterations however and congress failed to reach a 
consensus in september five states assembled in the annapolis convention one 
seven eight six to discuss adjustments that would improve commerce under their 
chairman alexander hamilton they invited state representatives to convene in 
philadelphia to discuss improvements to the federal government after debate 
congress endorsed the plan to revise the articles of confederation on february 
two one one seven eight seven according to some historians the articles were 
flawed in particular the confederal government was unable to settle state 
disputes on issues like trade and had no power to tax directly after all the 
states were thirteen individual republics it took radical action to strip them 
of that sovereignty lessons although ultimately replaced by the united states 
constitution the articles of confederation provided stability during the 
american revolutionary war years most importantly the experience of drafting 
and living under this initial document provided valuable lessons in self 
governance and somewhat tempered fears about a powerful central government 
still reconciling the turmoil between state and federal authority continues to 
challenge america as seen in such conflicts as the one eight three two 
nullification crisis the american civil war one eight six one six five post 
civil war reconstruction and the supreme court s landmark brown v board of 
education decision in one nine five four signatures the copy of the articles in 
the u s national archives has a series of signatures on page six a list of them 
is presented here the signing of the articles was a process that has caused 
some confusion the articles were approved for distribution to the states on 
november one five one seven seven seven a copy was made for each state and one 
was kept by the congress the copies sent to the states for ratification were 
unsigned and a cover letter had only the signatures of henry laurens and 
charles thomson who were the president and secretary to the congress but the 
articles at that time were unsigned and the date was blank congress began the 
signing process by examining their copy of the articles on june two seven one 
seven seven eight they ordered a final copy prepared the one in the national 
archives and that delegates should inform the secretary of their authority for 
ratification then on july nine one seven seven eight the prepared copy was 
ready they dated it and began to sign they also requested each of the remaining 
states to notify its delegation when ratification was completed on that date 
delegates present from new hampshire massachusetts rhode island connecticut new 
york pennsylvania virginia and south carolina signed the articles to indicate 
that their states had ratified new jersey delaware and maryland could not since 
their states had not ratified north carolina and georgia also didn t sign that 
day since their delegations were absent after the first signing some delegates 
signed at the next meeting they attended for example john wentworth of new 
hampshire added his name on august eight john penn was the first of north 
carolina s delegates to arrive on july one zero and the delegation signed the 
articles on july two one one seven seven eight the other states had to wait 
until they ratified the articles and notified their congressional delegation 
georgia signed on july two four new jersey on november two six and delaware on 
february one two one seven seven nine after a wait of two years maryland 
ratified and her delegates signed the articles on march one one seven eight one 
the articles were finally in force congress had debated the articles for over a 
year and a half and the ratification process had taken nearly three and a half 
years many participants in the original debates were no longer delegates and 
some of the signers had only recently arrived the articles of confederation and 
perpetual union were signed by a group of men who were never present in the 
congress at the same time the signers and the states they represented were new 
hampshire josiah bartlett and john wentworth jr massachusetts bay john hancock 
samuel adams elbridge gerry francis dana james lovell and samuel holten rhode 
island and providence plantations william ellery henry marchant and john 
collins connecticut roger sherman samuel huntington oliver wolcott titus hosmer 
and andrew adams new york james duane francis lewis william duer and gouverneur 
morris new jersey john witherspoon and nathaniel scudder pennsylvania robert 
morris daniel roberdeau jonathan bayard smith william clingan and joseph reed 
delaware thomas mckean john dickinson and nicholas van dyke maryland john 
hanson and daniel carroll virginia richard henry lee john banister thomas adams 
john harvie and francis lightfoot lee north carolina john penn cornelius 
harnett and john williams south carolina henry laurens will henry drayton john 
mathews richard hutson and thomas heyward jr georgia john walton edward telfair 
and edward langworthy presidents of the congress of the confederation the 
following list are those who led the congress under the articles of 
confederation as the presidents of the united states in congress assembled the 
president under the articles was the presiding officer of congress not the 
chief executive as is the president of the united states under the constitution 
also the articles defined the powers of a confederation of states as opposed to 
the current constitution which defines the powers of a federation of states 
samuel huntington thomas mckean john hanson elias boudinot thomas mifflin 
richard henry lee john hancock nathaniel gorham arthur st clair cyrus griffin 
for a full list of presidents of the congress assembled and presidents under 
the two continental congresses before the articles see president of the 
continental congress references monday november one seven one seven seven seven 
journals of the continental congress one seven seven four one seven eight nine 
a century of lawmaking one seven seven four one eight seven three letter george 
washington to george clinton september one one one seven eight three the george 
washington papers one seven four one one seven nine nine external links text 
version of the articles of confederation articles of confederation and 
perpetual union library of congress articles of confederation and related 
resources library of congress today in history november one five the united 
states constitution online the articles of confederation defunct constitutions 
united states historical documents legal history of the united states american 
revolution federalism one seven eight one in law adam sedgwick adam sedgwick 
march two two one seven eight five january two seven one eight seven three was 
one of the founders of modern geology he proposed the devonian period of the 
geological timescale and later the cambrian period the latter proposal was 
based on work which he did on welsh rock strata sedgwick was born in dent at 
that time in yorkshire the third child of an anglican vicar he was educated at 
sedbergh school and trinity college cambridge introduction in one eight one 
seven he took holy orders and in one eight one eight he became woodwardian 
professor of geology at the university of cambridge department of earth 
sciences holding a chair that had been endowed ninety years before by the 
natural historian john woodward he lacked formal training in geology but he 
quickly became an active researcher in geology and paleontology during his 
tenure he immensely enlarged the geological collections of cambridge university 
and carried out important field research all over great britain sedgwick is 
said to have remarked upon being appointed woodwardian professor hitherto i 
have never turned a stone henceforth i will leave no stone unturned in one 
eight two two he carried out fieldwork unraveling the complex geology of the 
lake district of northern england armed with the new discoveries and techniques 
of william smith he met and befriended the poet william wordsworth on this 
expedition and also met the poet robert southey and the chemist john dalton his 
lectures at cambridge were immensely popular he was a spellbinding lecturer and 
breaking with the traditions of his time his lectures were open to women whom 
sedgwick thought could make great contributions to natural history he continued 
to rise in his profession in one eight two nine he became president of the 
geological society of london and in one eight four five a vice master of 
trinity college as vice master he led campaigns to open cambridge to non 
anglicans and to reorganize the academic programs in the process meeting and 
becoming close to queen victoria and her consort prince albert by the one eight 
five zero s he was in poor health cared for by his niece isabella still he kept 
giving his famous lectures until one eight seven one early work sedgwick was 
one of several great figures in what has been called the heroic age of geology 
the time when the great geological time periods were defined and when much 
exploration and fundamental research was carried out sedgwick s work placed him 
at the epicenter of one of the most heated geological controversies of his day 
stemming from his work with the gentleman geologist roderick murchison they 
explored the geology of scotland in one eight two seven and in one eight three 
nine they jointly presented their researches on certain rocks in devon england 
which had a distinctive fossil assemblage that led them to propose a new 
division of the geological time scale the devonian in the early one eight three 
zero s both men were working on the rocks of wales which were and are very 
difficult to work on due to extensive folding and faulting however they seemed 
to be older than most of the sedimentary rocks farther east murchison 
documented the presence of a distinctive set of fossils one in which very few 
fish were found but that included numerous different types of trilobites 
brachiopods and other such fossils murchison named the system of rocks 
containing such fossils the silurian after the silures a celtic tribe living in 
the welsh borderlands at the time of the romans sedgwick who had been working 
in central wales proposed the existence of a separate system below the silurian 
which he named the cambrian after cambria the latin name for wales the two 
presented a joint paper in one eight three five entitled on the silurian and 
cambrian systems exhibiting the order in which the older sedimentary strata 
succeed each other in england and wales sedgwick s upper cambrian overlapped 
with the lower part of murchison s silurian sedgwick had defined his cambrian 
using physical characters of the rocks which were unique to wales and had not 
relied extensively on fossils which could be found everywhere murchison who had 
used fossils extensively in defining the silurian claimed at first that the 
upper cambrian and then the entire cambrian were really parts of the silurian 
the resulting quarrel between the two men left them permanently estranged and 
took years to resolve there was more than a simple matter of names involved 
both geologists wanted the honour of describing the rocks that recorded the 
beginning of life on earth for no fossils were known that were older than those 
of the cambrian murchison felt that the fossils of sedgwick s cambrian were not 
different enough from his silurian forms to merit the naming of a geologic time 
period and it was some time before truly distinctive cambrian fossils were 
documented today following the solution worked out in one eight seven nine by 
sedgwick s colleague charles lapworth geologists use both time periods with a 
third one the ordovician also named for a celtic tribe in wales between the 
cambrian and the silurian equivalent to the disputed upper cambrian lower 
silurian beds each one of these is now known to be characterized by distinct 
fossil assemblages disagreement with darwin for one summer of his work in wales 
which was to lead to this controversy sedgwick made a fateful choice of field 
assistant a young cambridge graduate named charles darwin darwin had passed his 
examinations for the bachelor of arts degree in january one eight three one and 
began attending sedgwick s geology lectures which he found fascinating that 
summer the two men explored the rocks of north wales darwin got a crash course 
in field geology from sedgwick an experience that would stand him in good stead 
over the next five years on the round the world voyage of hms beagle during 
this voyage darwin sent rocks and fossils from south america back to sedgwick 
as well as descriptions of the geology of south america these impressed 
sedgwick who wrote in a letter to darwin s family he is doing admirably in s 
america he was inducted into the society shortly after his return the two 
stayed friends until sedgwick s death but sedgwick was upset and disappointed 
by darwin s theory of evolution by natural selection after reading the origin 
of species sedgwick candidly wrote to darwin on november two four one eight 
five nine if i did not think you a good tempered parts i laughed at till my 
sides were almost sore other parts i read with absolute sorrow because i think 
them utterly false however despite this difference of opinion the two men 
remained friendly until sedgwick s death flawed opinions sedgwick s own 
geological views were generally catastrophic he believed that the history of 
the earth had been marked by a series of cataclysmic events which had destroyed 
much of the earth s life in this belief he followed cuvier and he was opposed 
to charles lyell s models of slow gradual geological change and a more or less 
steady state earth however sedgwick was interested in the possibility that at 
least some of the catastrophic changes implied by the rock record might be 
shown to be gradual he originally followed his colleague william buckland in 
believing that the uppermost pleistocene deposits had been laid down by the 
biblical flood but retracted this belief after many of these deposits turned 
out to have been formed by glaciers not floods sedgwick also did not object to 
evolution or development as such theories were called then in the broad sense 
to the fact that the life on earth had changed over time nor was he a young 
earth creationist he believed that the earth must be extremely old as darwin 
wrote of sedgwick s lectures what a capital hand is sedgewick sic for drawing 
large cheques upon the bank of time however sedgwick believed in the divine 
creation of life over long periods of time by a power i cannot imitate or 
comprehend but in which i believe by a legitimate conclusion of sound reason 
drawn from the laws of harmonies of nature what sedgwick objected to was the 
apparent amoral and materialist nature of darwin s proposed mechanism natural 
selection which he thought degrading to humanity s spiritual aspirations his 
letter of november two four went on to state this view of nature you have 
stated admirably tho admitted by all naturalists but how came it about here in 
language if i do not mistake your meaning you have done your best in one or two 
pregnant cases to break it were it possible which thank god it is not to break 
it humanity in my mind would suffer a damage that might brutalize it sink the 
human race into a lower grade of degradation than any into which it has fallen 
since its written records tell us of its history external links sedgwick museum 
cambridge sedgwick club cambridge university of cambridge department of earth 
sciences one seven eight five births one eight seven three deaths alumni of 
trinity college cambridge british geologists fellows of the royal society 
natives of cumbria aa river may refer to the aa river france in the north of 
france the aabach greifensee river in switzerland the aabach afte river in 
germany a tributary of the afte river the lielupe river called kurl ndische aa 
in german in latvia the gauja river called livl ndische aa in german in latvia 
arthur koestler arthur koestler september five one nine zero five budapest 
march three one nine eight three london was a hungarian polymath who became a 
naturalized british subject he wrote journalism novels social philosophy and 
books on scientific subjects he was a communist during much of the one nine 
three zero s and remained politically active until the one nine five zero s he 
wrote a number of popular books including arrow in the blue the first volume of 
his autobiography the yogi and the commissar a collection of essays many 
dealing with communism the sleepwalkers a history of man s changing vision of 
the universe the act of creation and the thirteenth tribe giving a new theory 
of the origins of the jews of eastern europe his most famous work the novel 
darkness at noon about the soviet purges of the one nine three zero s ranks 
with george orwell s nineteen eighty four as a fictional treatment of stalinism 
he also wrote encyclop dia britannica articles life he was born k sztler artur 
hungarians put the surname first in budapest hungary to a german speaking 
hungarian family of ashkenazi jewish descent his father henrik was an 
industrialist and inventor whose business ideas revealed flawed judgement for 
example he invested for a while in the manufacture of a kind of radioactive 
soap when artur was one four his family moved to vienna austria in one nine one 
eight hungary obtained its independence from austria and flirted for a while 
with bolshevism koestler studied science and psychology at the university of 
vienna where he became involved in zionism after completing his studies he 
worked as a news correspondent from one nine two six to one nine two nine he 
lived in the british mandate of palestine partly in a kibbutz he joined the 
german communist party in one nine three one but left it after the stalinist 
purges of one nine three eight during this period he traveled extensively in 
the soviet union and climbed mount ararat in turkey in turkmenistan he met the 
black american writer langston hughes in one nine three one he was a member of 
a zeppelin expedition to the north pole in his memoir the invisible writing 
koestler recalls that during the summer of one nine three five he wrote about 
half of a satirical novel called the good soldier schweik goes to war again it 
had been commissioned by willy m nzenberg the comintern s chief propagandist in 
the west but was vetoed by the party on the grounds of the book s pacifist 
errors p two eight three soon after the outbreak of world war ii the french 
authorities detained him for several months in a camp for resident aliens at le 
vernet in the foothills of the pyrenees mountains upon his release he joined 
the french foreign legion he eventually escaped to england via morocco and 
portugal in england he served in the british army as a member of the british 
pioneer corps one nine four one four two then worked for the bbc he became a 
british subject in one nine four five he returned to france after the war where 
he rubbed shoulders with the set gravitating around jean paul sartre and simone 
de beauvoir one of the characters in de beauvoir s novel the mandarins is 
believed based on koestler he returned to london and spent the rest of his life 
writing and lecturing he was made a cbe in the one nine seven zero s in one 
nine eight three koestler suffering from parkinson s disease and leukemia 
committed joint suicide by taking an overdose of drugs with his third wife 
cynthia he had long been an advocate of voluntary euthanasia and in one nine 
eight one had become vice president of exit a british group campaigning for it 
his will endowed the chair of parapsychology at the university of edinburgh in 
scotland multilingualism in addition to his mother tongue german koestler 
became fluent in hungarian english and french and knew some hebrew and russian 
his biographer david cesarani claims there is some evidence that koestler may 
have picked up some yiddish from his grandfather koestler s multilingualism was 
principally due to his having resided worked and or studied in hungary austria 
germany palestine pre independence israel the soviet union the united kingdom 
and france all by four zero years of age though he wrote the bulk of his later 
work in english koestler wrote his best known novels in three different 
languages the gladiators in hungarian darkness at noon in german although the 
original is now lost and arrival and departure in english his journalism was 
written in german hebrew french and english he claimed to have produced the 
first hebrew language crossword puzzles women koestler was married to dorothy 
asher one nine three five five zero mamaine paget one nine five zero five two 
and cynthia jefferies one nine six five eight three he also had a very short 
fling with the french writer simone de beauvoir one that may explain the mutual 
animosity between him and jean paul sartre david cesarani claimed that koestler 
beat and raped several women including film director jill craigie the resulting 
protests led to the removal of a bust of koestler from public display at the 
university of edinburgh questions have also been raised by his suicide pact 
with his last spouse although he was terminally ill at the time she was 
apparently healthy leading some to claim he wrongly persuaded her to take her 
own life mixed legacy just as darkness at noon was selling well during the cold 
war of the four zero s and five zero s koestler announced his retirement from 
politics much of what he wrote thereafter revealed a multidisciplinary thinker 
whose work anticipated a number of trends by many years he was among the first 
to experiment with lsd in a laboratory he also wrote about japanese and indian 
mysticism in the lotus and the robot one nine six zero he did not merely arrive 
at different answers to accepted questions rather he tended to ask questions 
that no one else thought to ask this originality resulted in an uneven set of 
ideas and conclusions some of them such as his work on creativity insight and 
outlook act of creation and the history of science the sleepwalkers are 
arguably brilliant and challenge us to readjust our thinking some of his other 
pursuits such as his interest in the paranormal his support for euthanasia his 
theory of the origin of ashkenazi jews like himself and his disagreement with 
darwinism are more controversial politics koestler was involved in a number of 
political causes during his life from zionism and communism to anti communism 
voluntary euthanasia and campaigns against capital punishment particularly 
hanging he was also an early advocate of nuclear disarmament journalism until 
the bestseller status of darkness at noon made him financially comfortable 
koestler often earned his living as a journalist and foreign correspondent 
trading on his ability to write quickly in several languages and to acquire 
with facility a working knowledge of a new language he wrote for a variety of 
newspapers including vossische zeitung science editor and b z am mittag foreign 
editor in the one nine two zero s in the early one nine three zero s he worked 
for the ullstein publishing group in berlin and did freelance writing for the 
french press while covering the spanish civil war in one nine three seven he 
was captured and held for several months by the falangists in m laga until the 
british foreign office negotiated his release his spanish testament records 
these experiences which he soon transformed into his classic prison novel 
darkness at noon after his release from spanish detention koestler worked for 
the news chronicle then edited die zukunft with willi m nzenberg an anti nazi 
anti stalinist german language paper based in paris founded in one nine three 
eight during and after wwii he wrote for a number of english and american 
papers including the sunday telegraph on various subjects science during the 
last three zero years of his life koestler wrote extensively on science and 
scientific practice the post modernist scepticism colouring much of this 
writing tended to alienate most of the scientific community a case in point is 
his one nine seven one book the case of the midwife toad about the biologist 
paul kammerer who claimed to find experimental support for lamarckian 
inheritance mysticism and a fascination with the paranormal imbued much of his 
later work and greatly influenced his personal life he left a substantial part 
of his estate to establish the koestler institute at the university of 
edinburgh dedicated to the study of paranormal phenomena his the roots of 
coincidence centered on yet another line of unconventional research by paul 
kammerer this time his claim of a quantum theory of coincidence or 
synchronicity a theory koestler evaluated in light of the writings of carl jung 
more controversial were koestler s studies of levitation and telepathy judaism 
although a lifelong atheist koestler s ancestry was jewish his biographer david 
cesarani has claimed that koestler deliberately disowned his jewish ancestry 
koestler s book the thirteenth tribe advanced the controversial thesis that 
ashkenazi jews are not descended from the israelites of antiquity but from the 
khazars a turkic people in the caucasus who converted to judaism in the eight 
th century and were later forced to move westwards into current russia ukraine 
and poland koestler stated that part of his intent in writing the thirteenth 
tribe was to defuse anti semitism by undermining the identification of european 
jews with biblical jews with the hope of rendering anti semitic epithets such 
as christ killer inapplicable ironically koestler s thesis that ashkenazi jews 
are not semitic has become an important claim of many anti semitic groups some 
palestinians have eagerly seized upon this thesis believing that to identify 
most jews as non semites seriously undermines their historical claim to the 
land of israel the thesis of the thirteenth tribe has since been criticized to 
date the genetic evidence has been inconclusive some researchers claim to find 
a middle eastern genetic element in virtually all ashkenazim others note both 
turkic words and turkic genetic markers in these populations but the usefulness 
of genetic markers in determining ancestry can be problematic for instance 
ashkenazim also display a high level of similarity to the genetic markers of 
khoisan bushmen in southern africa a thorough review of the scientific 
literature can be found at khazaria com when koestler resided in palestine 
during the one nine two zero s he lived on a kibbutz an experience forming the 
basis of his unfinished thieves in the night his view of israel was that it 
would never be destroyed short of a second shoah he supported the statehood of 
israel but opposed a diaspora jewish culture in an interview published in the 
london jewish chronicle around the time of israel s founding koestler asserted 
that all jews should either migrate to israel or assimilate completely into 
their local cultures koestler was also no dogmatic zionist for instance he 
proposed that israel drop the hebrew alphabet for the roman cultural influence 
in his younger days the singer sting was an avid reader of koestler his band of 
the time the police were to name one of their albums ghost in the machine after 
one of koestler s books the title synchronicity was also inspired by koestler s 
the roots of coincidence which mentions carl jung s theory of the same name 
koestler knew little about the burgeoning new wave music scene and is alleged 
to have said look at this did you ever see a magazine called the new musical 
express it turns out there is a pop group called the police i don t know why 
they are called that presumably to distinguish them from the punks and they ve 
made an album of my essay the ghost in the machine i didn t know anything about 
it until my clipping agency sent me a review of the record the cyberpunk manga 
and anime series ghost in the shell was also inspired by koestler s the ghost 
in the machine bibliography an excellent introduction to koestler s writing and 
thought is the following anthology of passages from many of his books described 
as a selection from five zero years of his writings chosen and with new 
commentary by the author one nine eight zero bricks to babel random house isbn 
zero three nine four five one eight nine seven seven autobiography one nine 
five two arrow in the blue the first volume of an autobiography one nine zero 
five three one two zero zero five reprint isbn zero zero nine nine four nine 
zero six seven six one nine five four the invisible writing the second volume 
of an autobiography one nine three two four zero one nine eight four reprint 
isbn zero eight one two eight six two one eight x one nine three seven spanish 
testament one nine four one scum of the earth one nine eight four stranger on 
the square the books the lotus and the robot the god that failed and von 
weissen n chten und roten tagen as well as his numerous essays all contain 
autobiographical information biographies atkins j one nine five six arthur 
koestler buckard christian g two zero zero four arthur koestler ein extremes 
leben one nine zero five one nine eight three isbn three four zero six five two 
one seven seven zero david cesarani one nine nine eight arthur koestler the 
homeless mind isbn zero six eight four eight six seven two zero six hamilton 
iain one nine eight two koestler a biography isbn zero zero two five four seven 
six six zero two koestler mamaine one nine eight five living with koestler isbn 
zero two nine seven seven eight five three one one or isbn zero three one two 
four nine zero two nine one levene m one nine eight four arthur koestler isbn 
zero eight zero four four six four one two x mikes george one nine eight three 
arthur koestler the story of a friendship isbn zero two three three nine seven 
six one two four pearson s a one nine seven eight arthur koestler isbn zero 
eight zero five seven six six nine nine five langston hughes s autobiography 
also documents their meeting in turkestan during the soviet era books by 
koestler excluding autobiography one nine three three von weissen n chten und 
roten tagen very difficult to find one nine three five the good soldier schweik 
goes to war again unfinished and unpublished one nine three seven l espagne 
ensanglant e one nine three nine the gladiators one nine six seven reprint isbn 
zero zero two five six five three two zero two a novel on the revolt of 
spartacus one nine four zero darkness at noon isbn zero zero nine nine four two 
four nine one six one nine four two dialogue with death abridgement of spanish 
testament one nine four three arrival and departure novel one nine nine zero 
reprint isbn zero one four zero one eight one one nine nine one nine four five 
the yogi and the commissar and other essays one nine four five twilight bar 
drama one nine four six thieves in the night novel one nine four nine the 
challenge of our time one nine four nine promise and fulfilment palestine one 
nine one seven one nine four nine one nine four nine insight and outlook one 
nine five five the trail of the dinosaur and other essays one nine five six 
reflections on hanging one nine five nine the sleepwalkers a history of man s 
changing vision of the universe isbn zero one four zero one nine two four six 
eight one nine six zero the watershed a biography of johannes kepler based on 
the sleepwalkers isbn zero three eight five zero nine five seven six seven one 
nine six zero lotus and the robot isbn zero zero nine zero five nine eight nine 
one one koestler s journey to india and japan and his assessment of east and 
west one nine six one control of the mind one nine six one hanged by the neck 
reuses some material from reflections on hanging one nine six three suicide of 
a nation one nine six four the act of creation one nine six seven the ghost in 
the machine penquin reprint one nine nine zero isbn zero one four zero one nine 
one nine two five one nine six eight drinkers of infinity essays one nine five 
five one nine six seven one nine seven zero the age of longing isbn zero zero 
nine one zero four five two zero seven one nine seven one the case of the 
midwife toad isbn zero three nine four seven one eight two three two an account 
of paul kammerer s research on lamarckian evolution and what he called serial 
coincidences one nine seven two the roots of coincidence isbn zero three nine 
four seven one nine three four four sequel to the case of the midwife toad one 
nine seven two the call girls a tragicomedy with a prologue and epilogue play 
one nine seven three the lion and the ostrich one nine seven four the heel of 
achilles essays one nine six eight one nine seven three isbn zero three nine 
four four nine five nine six nine one nine seven six the thirteenth tribe the 
khazar empire and its heritage isbn zero three nine four four zero two eight 
four seven one nine seven six astride the two cultures arthur koestler at seven 
zero isbn zero three nine four four zero zero six three one one nine seven 
seven twentieth century views a collection of critical essays isbn zero one 
three zero four nine two one three two one nine seven eight janus a summing up 
isbn zero three nine four five zero zero five two zero sequel to the ghost in 
the machine one nine eight one kaleidoscope essays from drinkers of infinity 
and the heel of achilles plus later pieces and stories writings as a 
contributor encyclopaedia of sexual knowledge one nine three five foreign 
correspondent one nine three nine the practice of sex one nine four zero the 
god that failed one nine five zero collection of testimonies by ex communists 
attila the poet one nine five four encounter one nine five four two five on 
loan at the ucl library of the school of slavonic courage is never to let your 
actions be influenced by your fears creative activity could be described as a 
type of learning process where teacher and pupil are located in the same 
individual nothing is more sad than the death of an illusion prometheus is 
reaching out for the stars with an empty grin on his face scientists are 
peeping toms at the keyhole of eternity the more original a discovery the more 
obvious it seems afterwards the most persistent sound which reverberates 
through man s history is the beating of war drums the principle mark of genius 
is not perfection but originality the opening of new frontiers true creativity 
often starts where language ends external links koestler parapsychology unit 
koestler and his third spouse left a large sum of money for research into 
parapsychology this funded amongst other things the koestler parapsychology 
unit at edinburgh university http koestlerarthur fw hu arthur koestler project 
one nine zero five births one nine eight three deaths commanders of the british 
empire hungarian philosophers hungarian novelists hungarian writers khazar 
studies writers who committed suicide the atlantic ocean is earth s second 
largest ocean covering approximately one fifth of its surface the ocean s name 
derived from greek mythology means the sea of atlas this ocean occupies an 
elongated s shaped basin extending in a north south direction and is divided 
into the north atlantic and south atlantic by equatorial counter currents at 
about eight north latitude bounded by the americas on the west and europe and 
africa on the east the atlantic is linked to the pacific ocean by the arctic 
ocean on the north and the drake passage on the south an artificial connection 
between the atlantic and pacific is also provided by the panama canal on the 
east the dividing line between the atlantic and the indian ocean is the two 
zero east meridian running south from cape agulhas to antarctica the atlantic 
is separated from the arctic ocean by a line from greenland to northwestern 
iceland and then from northeastern iceland to southernmost tip of spitsbergen 
and then to north cape in northern norway the atlantic ocean as seen from the 
west coast of ireland on a fair day covering approximately two zero of earth s 
surface the atlantic ocean is second only to the pacific in size with its 
adjacent seas it occupies an area of about one zero six four zero zero zero 
zero zero square kilometres four one one zero zero zero zero zero square miles 
without them it has an area of eight two four zero zero zero zero zero square 
kilometres three one eight zero zero zero zero zero sq mi the land area that 
drains into the atlantic is four times that of either the pacific or indian 
oceans the volume of the atlantic ocean with its adjacent seas is three five 
four seven zero zero zero zero zero cubic kilometres eight five one zero zero 
zero zero zero cu mi and without them three two three six zero zero zero zero 
zero cubic kilometres seven seven six four zero zero zero zero cu mi the 
average depths of the atlantic with its adjacent seas is three three three two 
metres one zero nine three two ft without them it is three nine two six metres 
one two eight eight one ft the greatest depth eight six zero five metres two 
eight two three two ft is in the puerto rico trench the width of the atlantic 
varies from two eight four eight kilometres one seven seven zero miles between 
brazil and liberia to about four eight three zero kilometes three zero zero 
zero mi between the united states and northern africa the atlantic ocean has 
irregular coasts indented by numerous bays gulfs and seas these include the 
caribbean sea gulf of mexico gulf of st lawrence mediterranean sea black sea 
north sea labrador sea baltic sea and norwegian greenland sea islands in the 
atlantic ocean include faroe islands greenland iceland rockall great britain 
ireland fernando de noronha the azores the madeira islands the canaries the 
cape verde islands sao tome e principe newfoundland bermuda the west indies 
ascension st helena trindade martin vaz tristan da cunha the falkland islands 
and south georgia island atlantic ocean ocean bottom the principal feature of 
the bottom topography of the atlantic ocean is a great submarine mountain range 
called the mid atlantic ridge it extends from iceland in the north to 
approximately five eight south latitude reaching a maximum width of about one 
six zero zero kilometres one zero zero zero mi a great rift valley also extends 
along the ridge over most of its length the depth of water over the ridge is 
less than two seven zero zero metres eight nine zero zero ft in most places and 
several mountain peaks rise above the water forming islands the south atlantic 
ocean has an additional submarine ridge the walvis ridge the mid atlantic ridge 
separates the atlantic ocean into two large troughs with depths averaging 
between three seven zero zero and five five zero zero metres one two zero zero 
zero and one eight zero zero zero ft transverse ridges running between the 
continents and the mid atlantic ridge divide the ocean floor into numerous 
basins some of the larger basins are the guiana north american cape verde and 
canaries basins in the north atlantic the largest south atlantic basins are the 
angola cape argentina and brazil basins the deep ocean floor is thought to be 
fairly flat although numerous seamounts and some guyots exist several deeps or 
trenches are also found on the ocean floor the puerto rico trench in the north 
atlantic is the deepest the laurentian abyss is found off the eastern coast of 
canada in the south atlantic the south sandwich trench reaches a depth of eight 
four two eight metres two seven six five one ft a third major trench the 
romanche trench is located near the equator and reaches a depth of about seven 
four five four metres two four four five five ft the shelves along the margins 
of the continents constitute about one one of the bottom topography in addition 
a number of deep channels cut across the continental rise ocean sediments are 
composed of terrigenous pelagic and authigenic material terrigenous deposits 
consist of sand mud and rock particles formed by erosion weathering and 
volcanic activity on land and then washed to sea these materials are largely 
found on the continental shelves and are thickest off the mouths of large 
rivers or off desert coasts pelagic deposits which contain the remains of 
organisms that sink to the ocean floor include red clays and globigerina 
pteropod and siliceous oozes covering most of the ocean floor and ranging in 
thickness from six zero metres to three three zero zero metres two zero zero ft 
to one one zero zero zero ft they are thickest in the convergence belts and in 
the zones of upwelling authigenic deposits consist of such materials as 
manganese nodules they occur where sedimentation proceeds slowly or where 
currents sort the deposits water characteristics the salinity of the surface 
waters in the open ocean ranges from three three to three seven parts per 
thousand by mass and varies with latitude and season although the minimum 
salinity values are found just north of the equator in general the lowest 
values are in the high latitudes and along coasts where large rivers flow into 
the ocean maximum salinity values occur at about two five north latitude 
surface salinity values are influenced by evaporation precipitation river 
inflow and melting of sea ice surface water temperatures which vary with 
latitude current systems and season and reflect the latitudinal distribution of 
solar energy range from less than two c to two nine c two eight f to eight four 
f maximum temperatures occur north of the equator and minimum values are found 
in the polar regions in the middle latitudes the area of maximum temperature 
variations values may vary by seven c to eight c one three f to one five f the 
atlantic ocean consists of four major water masses the north and south atlantic 
central waters constitute the surface waters the sub antarctic intermediate 
water extends to depths of one zero zero zero metres three three zero zero ft 
the north atlantic deep water reaches depths of as much as four zero zero zero 
metres one three two zero zero ft the antarctic bottom water occupies ocean 
basins at depths greater than four zero zero zero metres one three two zero 
zero ft within the north atlantic ocean currents isolate a large elongated body 
of water known as the sargasso sea in which the salinity is noticeably higher 
than average the sargasso sea contains large amounts of seaweed and is also the 
spawning ground for the european eel due to the coriolis effect water in the 
north atlantic circulates in a clockwise direction whereas water circulation in 
the south atlantic is counter clockwise the south tides in the atlantic ocean 
are semi diurnal that is two high tides occur during each two four lunar hours 
the tides are a general wave that moves from south to north in latitudes above 
four zero north some east west oscillation occurs climate waves in the trade 
winds in the atlantic ocean areas of converging winds that move along the same 
track as the prevailing wind create instabilities in the atmosphere that may 
lead to the formation of hurricanes the climate of the atlantic ocean and 
adjacent land areas is influenced by the temperatures of the surface waters and 
water currents as well as the winds blowing across the waters because of the 
oceans great capacity for retaining heat maritime climates are moderate and 
free of extreme seasonal variations precipitation can be approximated from 
coastal weather data and air temperature from the water temperatures the oceans 
are the major source of the atmospheric moisture that is obtained through 
evaporation climatic zones vary with latitude the warmest climatic zones 
stretch across the atlantic north of the equator the coldest zones are in the 
high latitudes with the coldest regions corresponding to the areas covered by 
sea ice ocean currents contribute to climatic control by transporting warm and 
cold waters to other regions adjacent land areas are affected by the winds that 
are cooled or warmed when blowing over these currents the gulf stream for 
example warms the atmosphere of the british isles and northwestern europe and 
the cold water currents contribute to heavy fog off the coast of northeastern 
canada the grand banks area and the northwestern coast of africa in general 
winds tend to transport moisture and warm or cool air over land areas 
hurricanes develop in the southern part of the north atlantic ocean history and 
economy the atlantic ocean appears to be the second youngest of the world s 
oceans after the southern ocean evidence indicates that it did not exist prior 
to one eight zero million years ago when the continents that formed from the 
breakup of the ancestral supercontinent pangaea were being rafted apart by the 
process of seafloor spreading the atlantic has been extensively explored since 
the earliest settlements were established along its shores the vikings 
portuguese and christopher columbus were the most famous among its early 
explorers after columbus european exploration rapidly accelerated and many new 
trade routes were established as a result the atlantic became and remains the 
major artery between europe and the americas known as transatlantic trade 
numerous scientific explorations have been undertaken including those by the 
german meteor expedition columbia university s lamont geological observatory 
and the united states navy hydrographic office the ocean has also contributed 
significantly to the development and economy of the countries around it besides 
its major transatlantic transportation and communication routes the atlantic 
offers abundant petroleum deposits in the sedimentary rocks of the continental 
shelves and the world s richest fishing resources especially in the waters 
covering the shelves the major species of fish caught are cod haddock hake 
herring and mackerel the most productive areas include the grand banks of 
newfoundland the shelf area off nova scotia georges bank off cape cod the 
bahama banks the waters around iceland the irish sea the dogger bank of the 
north sea and the falkland banks eel lobster and whales have also been taken in 
great quantities all these factors taken together tremendously enhance the 
atlantic s great commercial value because of the threats to the ocean 
environment presented by oil spills marine debris and the incineration of toxic 
wastes at sea various international treaties exist to reduce some forms of 
pollution in one eight five eight the first transatlantic telegraph cable was 
laid by cyrus field in one nine one nine the american nc four became the first 
airplane to cross the atlantic though it made a couple of landings on islands 
along the way later in one nine one nine a british airplane piloted by alcock 
and brown made the first non stop transatlantic flight from newfoundland to 
ireland in one nine two one the british were the first to cross the north 
atlantic in an airship in one nine two two the portuguese were the first to 
cross the south atlantic in an airship the first transatlantic telephone call 
was made on january seven one nine two seven in one nine two seven charles 
lindbergh made the first solo non stop transatlantic flight in an airplane 
between new york city and paris after rowing for eight one days and two nine 
six two miles on december three one nine nine nine tori murden became the first 
woman to cross the atlantic ocean by rowboat alone when she reached guadeloupe 
from the canary islands location body of water between africa europe the 
southern ocean and the americas geographic coordinates map references world 
area total seven six seven six two million km two nine six three seven million 
mi note includes the baltic sea black sea caribbean sea davis strait denmark 
strait part of the drake passage gulf of mexico labrador sea mediterranean sea 
north sea norwegian sea almost all of the scotia sea and other tributary water 
bodies area comparative slightly less than six five times the size of the 
united states coastline one one one eight six six km six nine five one zero mi 
climate tropical cyclones hurricanes develop anywhere from off the coast of 
africa near cape verde to the windward islands and move westward into the 
caribbean sea or up the east coast of north america hurricanes can occur from 
may to december but are most frequent from late july to early november storms 
are common in the north atlantic during northern winters making ocean crossings 
more difficult and dangerous terrain the surface is usually covered with sea 
ice in the labrador sea denmark strait and baltic sea from october to june 
there is a clockwise warm water gyre broad circular system of currents in the 
northern atlantic and a counter clockwise warm water gyre in the southern 
atlantic the ocean floor is dominated by the mid atlantic ridge a rugged north 
south centerline for the entire atlantic basin first discovered by the 
challenger expedition elevation extremes lowest point milwaukee deep in the 
puerto rico trench eight six zero five metres two eight two three two ft five 
three mi highest point sea level zero metres natural resources petroleum and 
gas fields fish marine mammals seals and whales sand and gravel aggregates 
placer deposits polymetallic nodules precious stones natural hazards icebergs 
are common in the davis strait denmark strait and the northwestern atlantic 
ocean from february to august and have been spotted as far south as bermuda and 
the madeira islands ships are subject to superstructure icing in extreme 
northern atlantic from october to may persistent fog can be a maritime hazard 
from may to september so can hurricanes north of the equator may to december 
the bermuda triangle is popularly believed to be the site of numerous aviation 
and shipping incidents due to unexplained and supposedly mysterious causes but 
coastguard records do not support this belief current environmental issues 
endangered marine species include the manatee seals sea lions turtles and 
whales drift net fishing is killing dolphins albatrosses and other seabirds 
petrels auks hastening the decline of fish stocks and contributing to 
international disputes there is municipal sludge pollution off the eastern 
united states southern brazil and eastern argentina oil pollution in the 
caribbean sea gulf of mexico lake maracaibo mediterranean sea and north sea and 
industrial waste and municipal sewage pollution in the baltic sea north sea and 
mediterranean sea notes on geography major chokepoints include the strait of 
gibraltar and the panama canal strategic straits include the strait of dover 
straits of florida mona passage the sound oresund and windward passage the 
equator divides the atlantic ocean into the north atlantic ocean and south 
atlantic ocean previously known as the ethiopic ocean during the cold war the 
so called greenland iceland uk giuk gap was a major strategic concern the 
seabed in that area was laid with extensive hydrophone systems to track soviet 
submarines ports and harbours aberdeen united kingdom abidjan c te d ivoire a 
coru a spain accra ghana lesund norway amsterdam netherlands antwerp belgium 
bahia blanca argentina baltimore united states banjul the gambia belfast 
northern ireland bergen norway bissau guinea bissau bod norway bordeaux france 
boston united states bremen germany brest france bristol england cadiz spain 
cape town south africa casablanca morocco cayenne french guiana charleston 
united states charlottetown canada cherbourg france conakry guinea cork 
republic of ireland cotonou benin dakar senegal douala cameroon dublin republic 
of ireland dunkirk france edinburgh scotland everglades port united states 
fortaleza brazil georgetown guyana glasgow scotland gothenburg sweden hamburg 
germany halifax canada jacksonville united states lagos nigeria las palmas 
spain le havre france libreville gabon lisbon portugal liverpool england lom 
togo london england luanda angola macei brazil malabo equatorial guinea miami 
united states monrovia liberia montr al canada morehead city united states 
nantes france nantucket united states narvik norway new haven united states new 
london united states new york united states newcastle upon tyne england newport 
news united states norfolk united states nouakchott mauritania oslo norway 
ostend belgium palm beach united states paramaribo suriname peterhead united 
kingdom philadelphia united states port harcourt nigeria portland united states 
porto portugal porto novo benin portsmouth england portsmouth united states 
providence united states puerto cortes honduras qu bec canada rabat morocco 
recife brazil reykjav k iceland rio de janeiro brazil rotterdam netherlands 
salvador brazil saint nazaire france santa cruz de tenerife spain santander 
spain santos brazil savannah united states seville spain saint john canada sept 
les canada st john s canada southampton england stavanger norway sydney canada 
tangier morocco trois rivi res canada troms norway trondheim norway vigo spain 
vit ria brazil walvis bay namibia willemstad netherlands antilles wilmington 
united states yarmouth canada note on transportation the saint lawrence seaway 
is an important waterway references much of this article comes from the public 
domain site http oceanographer navy mil atlantic html dead link it is now 
accessible from the internet archive at http web archive org web two zero zero 
two zero two two one two one five five one four http three a oceanographer navy 
mil atlantic html disclaimers for this website including its status as a public 
domain resource are recorded on the internet archive at http web archive org 
web two zero zero two zero two one two zero two one zero four nine http three a 
oceanographer navy mil warning html external links noaa in situ ocean data 
viewer plot and download ocean observations cia the world factbook atlantic 
ocean atlantic ocean oceans arthur schopenhauer february two two one seven 
eight eight september two one one eight six zero was a german philosopher he is 
most famous for his work the world as will and representation he is commonly 
known for having espoused a sort of philosophical pessimism that saw life as 
being essentially evil futile and full of suffering however upon closer 
inspection in accordance with eastern thought especially that of hinduism and 
buddhism he saw salvation deliverance or escape from suffering in aesthetic 
contemplation sympathy for others and ascetic living his ideas profoundly 
influenced the fields of philosophy psychology music and literature life 
schopenhauer was born in one seven eight eight in sztutowo poland near gda sk 
he was the son of heinrich floris schopenhauer and johanna schopenhauer a 
middle class mercantile family of dutch heritage although they had strong 
feelings against any kind of nationalism indeed the name arthur was selected by 
his father especially because it was the same in english german and french his 
parents were both from the city and johanna was an author as well after the 
city was annexed by prussia during the second partition of poland in one seven 
nine three the schopenhauer family fled to hamburg in one eight zero five 
schopenhauer s father died possibly by suicide and johanna moved to weimar 
because of a promise to pursue a business career schopenhauer remained in 
hamburg his disgust of this career however drove him away to join his mother in 
weimar after only a year he never got along with his mother when the writer 
goethe who was a friend of johanna schopenhauer told her that he thought her 
son was destined for great things johanna objected she had never heard there 
could be two geniuses in a single family schopenhauer studied at the university 
of g ttingen and was awarded a phd from the university of jena in one eight two 
zero schopenhauer became a lecturer at the university of berlin it was there 
that his opposition to hegel began while in berlin schopenhauer became involved 
in a consuming lawsuit from a caroline marquet she asked for damages from him a 
man of independent means on the basis that she had been injured when 
schopenhauer allegedly pushed her marquet had noisily attracted schopenhauer s 
attention then marquet s companion witnessed her as being prostrate outside of 
his apartment marquet claimed that the philosopher had assaulted and battered 
her after she refused to leave his doorway in this manner she succeeded in 
gaining through the court a portion of schopenhauer s limited wealth he had to 
make payments for many years his reputation was permanently damaged by her 
legal machination schopenhauer s health deteriorated during the year of one 
eight six zero he died of natural causes on september two one of the same year 
at the age of seven two schopenhauer called himself a kantian and despised 
hegel he formulated a pessimistic philosophy that gained importance and support 
after the failure of the german and austrian revolutions of one eight four 
eight philosophy schopenhauer s starting point was kant s division of the 
universe into phenomenon and noumenon claiming that the noumenon was the same 
as that in us which we call will it is the inner content and the driving force 
of the world for schopenhauer human will had ontological primacy over the 
intellect in other words desire is understood to be prior to thought and in a 
parallel sense will is said to be prior to being in solving alleviating the 
fundamental problems of life schopenhauer was rare among philosophers in 
considering philosophy and logic less important or less effective than art 
certain types of charitable practice loving kindness in his terms and certain 
forms of religious discipline schopenhauer concluded that discursive thought 
such as philosophy and logic could neither touch nor transcend the nature of 
desire i e the will in the world as will and representation schopenhauer 
posited that humans living in the realm of objects are living in the realm of 
desire and thus are eternally tormented by that desire his idea of the role of 
desire in life is similar to that of vedanta hinduism and buddhism and 
schopenhauer draws attention to these similarities himself while schopenhauer s 
philosophy may sound rather mystical in such a summary his methodology was 
resolutely empirical rather than speculative or transcendental schopenhauer s 
identification of the kantian noumenon i e the actually existing entity with 
what we call our will deserves some explanation the noumenon was what kant 
called the ding an sich the thing in itself the reality that is the foundation 
of our sensory and mental representations of an external world in kantian terms 
those sensory and mental representations are mere phenomena schopenhauer s 
assertion that what we call our will is the same as this noumenon might at 
first instance strike some as oddly as heraclitus s revelation that everything 
is made out of fire but kant s philosophy was formulated as a response to the 
radical philosophical skepticism of david hume and his fellow british 
empiricists who claimed that as far as we could tell there was no outside 
reality beyond our mental representations of it schopenhauer begins by arguing 
that kant s demarcation between external objects knowable only as phenomena and 
the thing in itself of noumenon contains a significant omission there is in 
fact one physical object we know more intimately than we know any object of 
sense perception it is our own body we know our human bodies have boundaries 
and occupy space the same way other objects known only through our named senses 
do though we seldom think of our bodies as physical objects we know even before 
reflection that it shares some of their properties we understand that a 
watermelon cannot successfully occupy the same space as an oncoming truck we 
know that if we tried to repeat the experiment with our own bodies we would 
obtain similar results we know this even if we do not understand the physics 
involved we know that our consciousness inhabits a physical body similar to 
other physical objects only known as phenomena yet our consciousness is not 
commensurate with our body most of us possess the power of voluntary motion we 
usually are not aware of our lungs breath or our heartbeat unless our attention 
is called to it our ability to control either is limited our kidneys command 
our attention on their schedule rather than one we choose few of us have any 
idea what our livers are doing right now though this organ is as needful as 
lungs heart or kidneys the conscious mind is the servant not the master of 
these and other organs these organs have an agenda which the conscious mind did 
not choose and has limited power over when schopenhauer identifies the noumenon 
with the desires needs and impulses in us that we name will what he is saying 
is that we participate in the reality of an otherwise unachievable world 
outside the mind through will we cannot prove that our mental picture of an 
outside world corresponds with a reality by reasoning through will we know 
without thinking that the world can stimulate us we suffer fear or desire these 
states arise involuntarily they arise prior to reflection they arise even when 
the conscious mind would prefer to hold them at bay the rational mind is for 
schopenhauer a leaf borne along in a stream of pre reflective and largely 
unconscious emotion that stream is will and through will if not through logic 
we can participate in the underlying reality that lies beyond mere phenomena it 
is for this reason that schopenhauer identifies the noumenon with what we call 
our will also schopenhauer s philosophy could be considered as panpsychism and 
solipsism and in some way gnostic psychology schopenhauer was perhaps even more 
influential in his treatment of man s mind than he was in the realm of 
philosophy philosophers have not traditionally been impressed by the 
tribulations of love but schopenhauer addressed it and related concepts 
forthrightly we should be surprised that a matter that generally plays such an 
important part in the life of man love has hitherto been almost entirely 
disregarded by philosophers and lies before us as raw and untreated material he 
gave a name to a force within man which he felt invariably had precedence over 
reason the will to live wille zum leben defined as an inherent drive within 
human beings and indeed all creatures to stay alive and to reproduce 
schopenhauer refused to conceive of love as either trifling or accidental but 
rather understood it to be an immensely powerful force lying unseen within man 
s psyche and dramatically shaping the world the ultimate aim of all love 
affairs is more important than all other aims in man s life and therefore it is 
quite worthy of the profound seriousness with which everyone pursues it what is 
decided by it is nothing less than the composition of the next generation these 
ideas foreshadowed and laid the groundwork for darwin s theory of evolution 
nietzsche s will to power and freud s concepts of the libido and the 
unconscious mind aesthetics see main article schopenhauer s aesthetics this 
wild and powerful drive to reproduce however caused suffering and pain in the 
world for schopenhauer one way to escape the suffering inherent in a world of 
will was through art through art schopenhauer thought the thinking subject 
could be jarred out of their limited individual perspective to feel a sense of 
the universal metaphysics directly the universal in question of course was the 
will the contest of personal desire with a world that was by nature inimical to 
its satisfaction is inevitably tragical therefore the highest place in art was 
given to tragedy music was also given a special status in schopenhauer s 
aesthetics as it did not rely upon the medium of representation to communicate 
a sense of the universal schopenhauer believed the function of art to be a 
meditation on the unity of human nature and an attempt to either demonstrate or 
directly communicate to the audience a certain existential angst for which most 
forms of entertainment including bad art only provided a distraction a wide 
range of authors from thomas hardy to woody allen and artists have been 
influenced by this system of aesthetics and in the two zero th century this 
area of schopenhauer s work garnered more attention and praise than any other 
according to daniel albright two zero zero five schopenhauer thought that music 
was the only art that did not merely copy ideas but actually embodied the will 
itself politics schopenhauer s politics were for the most part a much 
diminished echo of his system of ethics the latter being expressed in die 
beiden grundprobleme der ethik available in english as two separate books on 
the basis of morality and on the freedom of the will ethics also occupies about 
one fourth of his central work the world as will and representation in 
occasional political comments in his parerga and paralimpomena and manuscript 
remains schopenhauer described himself as a proponent of limited government 
what was essential he thought was that the state should leave each man free to 
work out his own salvation and so long as government was thus limited he would 
prefer to be ruled by a lion than one of his fellow rats i e a monarch 
schopenhauer did however share the view of thomas hobbes on the necessity of 
the state and of state violence to check the destructive tendencies innate to 
our species schopenhauer by his own admission did not give much thought to 
politics and several times he writes prideful boasts of how little attention he 
had paid to political affairs of his day in a life that spanned several 
revolutions in french and german government and a few continent shaking wars he 
did indeed maintain his aloof position of minding not the times but the 
eternities schopenhauer on women schopenhauer is also famous for his essay on 
women ber die weiber in which he expressed his opposition to what he called 
teutonico christian stupidity on female affairs he claimed that woman is by 
nature meant to obey and opposed schiller s poem in honor of women w rde der 
frauen the essay does give two compliments however that women are decidedly 
more sober in their judgment than men are and are more sympathetic to the 
suffering of others however the latter was discounted as weakness rather than 
humanitarian virtue the ultra intolerant view of women contrasts with 
schopenhauer s generally liberal views on other social issues he was strongly 
against taboos on issues like suicide and masochism and condemned the treatment 
of african slaves this polemic on female nature has since been fiercely 
attacked as misogynistic however he did not hold a universally negative opinion 
of women in particular one should note that schopenhauer had a very high 
opinion of madame de guyon whose writings and biography he highly recommended 
in any case the controversial writing has influenced many from nietzsche to one 
nine th century feminists while schopenhauer s hostility to women may tell us 
more about his biography than about philosophy his biological analysis of the 
difference between the sexes and their separate roles in the struggle for 
survival and reproduction anticipates some of the claims that were later 
ventured by sociobiologists and evolutionary psychologists in the twentieth 
century schopenhauer on homosexuality schopenhauer was also one of the first 
philosophers since the days of greek philosophy to address the subject of male 
homosexuality in the third expanded edition of the world as will and 
representation one eight five six schopenhauer added an appendix to his chapter 
on the metaphysics of sexual love in it he develops the idea that since only 
mature men and fully adult but pre menopausal women are capable of bearing 
healthy children in early adolescence and in late middle age the sexual 
appetite is susceptible of being turned towards another channel while there may 
again be more autobiography than analysis in this hypothesis it is consistent 
with the general tenor of schopenhauer s thought which gives the will in nature 
the position of setting an agenda for individual lives it is also one of the 
first attempts at portraying homosexuality as a natural phenomenon 
acknowledging its existence in every culture and seeking to explain its 
appearance even in those cultures whose moralities sharply condemn homosexual 
behaviour schopenhauer on hegel schopenhauer seems to have disliked just about 
everything concerning his contemporary georg wilhelm friedrich hegel the 
following quotation from on the basis of morality page one five one six is 
quite famous but schopenhauer had good reason to mistrust the writings of hegel 
in his foreword to the first edition of his work die beiden grundprobleme der 
ethik schopenhauer had found hegel to have fallen prey to the post hoc ergo 
propter hoc fallacy schopenhauer s critique of hegel is most certainly directed 
at his perception that hegel s works use deliberately impressive but ultimately 
vacuous jargon and neologisms and that they contained castles of abstraction 
that sounded impressive but ultimately contained no verifiable content he also 
thought that his glorification of church and state were designed for personal 
advantage and had little to do with search for philosophical truth although 
schopenhauer may have appeared vain in his constant attacks on hegel they were 
not necessarily devoid of merit the right hegelians interpreted hegel as seeing 
the prussian state of his day as perfect and the goal of all history up until 
then common misconceptions many are put off schopenhauer by descriptions of him 
as an obstinate and arrogant man who did not lead the ascetic life that he 
glorified in his work the idea that he made resignation into a command to 
virtue is inaccurate as he was merely trying to explain asceticism in terms of 
metaphysics he does refer to the asceticism as a state of inner peace and 
cheerfulness but he also clearly states that he was not trying to recommend the 
denial of the will above the affirmation of the will furthermore the call to 
asceticism was supposed to come to select individuals as knowledge all of a 
sudden rather than being a virtue that can be taught in general he wrote it is 
a strange demand on a moralist that he should commend no other virtue than that 
which he himself possesses the world as will and representation vol i six eight 
nietzsche seems to have made this misinterpretation leading some people to a 
distorted view of schopenhauer the following sentence from the twilight of the 
idols is often quoted schopenhauer did see all these things as means to a more 
peaceful and enlightened way of life but none of them were denial of the will 
to live only asceticism is referred to in that way nietzsche also claimed that 
schopenhauer did not recognise that suffering had a redemptive quality yet his 
recognition of this seems blatantly clear in part four of the world as will and 
representation also his identification of the will with the kantian thing in 
itself has been misunderstood kant defined things in themselves as being beyond 
comprehension and that no one could know the inner nature of a material thing 
it is sometimes thought that schopenhauer denied this but he did not what he 
did assert was that one could know things about the thing in itself for example 
you can know that the will is a striving force that it is endless that it 
causes suffering that it will produce boredom if unoccupied etc however he did 
not say that you could directly know the will in addition it has sometimes been 
criticised that he never defined the will but he explained that it could not be 
fully defined influence schopenhauer is thought to have influenced the 
following intellectual figures and schools of thought friedrich nietzsche 
richard wagner sigmund freud charles darwin theodule ribot eugene o neill max 
horkheimer c g jung ludwig wittgenstein samuel beckett jorge luis borges dylan 
thomas emil cioran thomas mann phenomenalism and recursionism see also 
schopenhauer s criticism of the kantian philosophy bibliography major works ber 
die vierfache wurzel des satzes vom zureichenden grunde one eight one three on 
the fourfold root of the principle of sufficient reason ber das sehen und die 
farben one eight one six on vision and colours die welt als wille und 
vorstellung one eight one eight one eight one nine vol two one eight four four 
the world as will and representation sometimes also known in english as the 
world as will and idea vol one dover edition one nine six six isbn zero four 
eight six two one seven six one two vol two dover edition one nine six six isbn 
zero four eight six two one seven six two zero peter smith publisher hardcover 
set one nine six nine isbn zero eight four four six two eight eight five nine 
everyman paperback combined abridged edition two nine zero p isbn zero four six 
zero eight seven five zero five one ber den willen in der natur one eight three 
six on the will in nature ber die freiheit des menschlichen willens one eight 
three nine on freedom of the will ber die grundlage der moral one eight four 
zero on the basis of morality parerga und paralipomena one eight five one 
online texts ber religion from parerga und paralipomena ii german influence on 
friesian philosophy essay ber die weiber die kunst recht zu behalten the art of 
controversy bilingual source albright daniel two zero zero four modernism and 
music an anthology of sources p three nine n three four university of chicago 
press isbn zero two two six zero one two six seven zero external links 
biography and summary of his philosophy short biography contains the false view 
that schopenhauer was a solipsist indepth overview of his life and philosophy 
on the philosopher s impact on freud and psychology schopenhauer and aesthetic 
appreciation an essay on schopenhauer s debated place in the history of 
european philosophy detailing his relationship to earlier sources one seven 
eight eight births one eight six zero deaths natives of gda sk one nine th 
century philosophers atheist philosophers continental philosophers german 
philosophers idealists kantian philosophers angola is a country in southwestern 
africa bordering namibia the democratic republic of the congo and zambia and 
with a west coast along the atlantic ocean the exclave province cabinda has a 
border with congo brazzaville a former portuguese colony it has considerable 
natural resources among which oil and diamonds are the most relevant the 
country is nominally a democracy and is formally named the republic of angola 
portuguese rep blica de angola pron ipa origin and history of the name the name 
angola is a portuguese derivation of the bantu word n gola being the title of 
the native rulers of the quimbundos kingdom in the one six th century at the 
time of colonization by the portuguese history main article history of angola 
shows queen nzinga in peace negotiations with the portuguese governor in luanda 
one six five seven the earliest inhabitants of the area were khoisan hunter 
gatherers they were largely replaced by bantu tribes during bantu migrations in 
present day angola portugal settled in one four eight three at the river congo 
where the kongo state ndongo and lunda existed the kongo state stretched from 
modern gabon in the north to the kwanza river in the south portugal established 
in one five seven five a portuguese colony at luanda based on the slave trade 
the portuguese gradually took control of the coastal strip throughout the one 
six th century by a series of treaties and wars they formed the colony of 
angola the dutch occupied luanda from one six four one four eight providing a 
boost for anti portuguese states in one six four eight portugal retook luanda 
and initiated a process of military conquest of the kongo and ndongo states 
that ended with portuguese victory in one six seven one full portuguese 
administrative control of the interior didn t occur until the beginning of the 
two zero th century in one nine five one the colony was restyled as an overseas 
province also called portuguese west africa when portugal refused a 
decolonization process three independence movements emerged the popular 
movement for the liberation of angola movimento popular de liberta o de angola 
mpla with a base among kimbundu and the mixed race intelligentsia of luanda and 
links to communist parties in portugal and the eastern bloc the national 
liberation front of angola frente nacional de liberta o de angola fnla with an 
ethnic base in the bakongo region of the north and links to the united states 
and the mobutu regime in zaire and the national union for total independence of 
angola uni o nacional para a independ ncia total de angola unita led by jonas 
malheiro savimbi with an ethnic and regional base in the ovimbundu heartland in 
the center of the country after a one four year independence guerrilla war and 
the overthrow of fascist portugal s government by a military coup angola s 
nationalist parties began to negotiate for independence in january one nine 
seven five independence was to be declared in november one nine seven five 
almost immediately a civil war broke out between mpla unita and fnla 
exacerbated by foreign intervention south african troops struck an alliance of 
convenience with unita and invaded angola in august one nine seven five to 
ensure that there would be no interference by a newly independent angolan state 
in namibia which was then under south african control hodges two zero zero one 
one one cuban troops came to the support of the mpla in october one nine seven 
five enabling them to control the capital luanda and hold off the south african 
forces the mpla declared itself to be the de facto government of the country 
when independence was formally declared in november with agostinho neto as the 
first president in one nine seven six the fnla was defeated by a combination of 
mpla and cuban troops leaving the marxist mpla and unita backed by the united 
states and south africa to fight for power the conflict raged on fuelled by the 
geopolitics of the cold war and by the ability of both parties to access angola 
s natural resources the mpla drew upon the revenues of off shore oil resources 
while unita accessed alluvial diamonds that were easily smuggled through the 
region s very porous borders lebillon one nine nine nine in one nine nine one 
the factions agreed to turn angola into a multiparty state but after the 
current president jos eduardo dos santos of mpla won un supervised elections 
unita claimed there was fraud and fighting broke out again a one nine nine four 
peace accord lusaka protocol between the government and unita provided for the 
integration of former unita insurgents into the government a national unity 
government was installed in one nine nine seven but serious fighting resumed in 
late one nine nine eight rendering hundreds of thousands of people homeless 
president jos eduardo dos santos suspended the regular functioning of 
democratic instances due to the conflict on february two two two zero zero two 
jonas savimbi the leader of unita was shot dead and a cease fire was reached by 
the two factions unita gave up its armed wing and assumed the role of major 
opposition party although the political situation of the country seems to be 
normalizing president dos santos still hasn t allowed regular democratic 
processes to take place among angola s major problems are a serious 
humanitarian crisis a result of the prolonged war the abundance of minefields 
and the actions of guerrilla movements fighting for the independence of the 
northern exclave of cabinda frente para a liberta o do enclave de cabinda 
angola like many sub saharan nations is subject to periodic outbreaks of 
infectious diseases in april two zero zero five angola was in the midst of an 
outbreak of the marburg virus which was rapidly becoming the worst outbreak of 
a haemorrhagic fever in recorded history with over two three seven deaths 
recorded out of two six one reported cases and having spread to seven out of 
the one eight provinces as of april one nine two zero zero five politics main 
article politics of angola the executive branch of the government is composed 
of the president the prime minister currently fernando da piedade dias dos 
santos and council of ministers currently political power is concentrated in 
the presidency the council of ministers composed of all government ministers 
and vice ministers meets regularly to discuss policy issues governors of the 
one eight provinces are appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the president 
the constitutional law of one nine nine two establishes the broad outlines of 
government structure and delineates the rights and duties of citizens the legal 
system is based on portuguese and customary law but is weak and fragmented and 
courts operate in only one two of more than one four zero municipalities a 
supreme court serves as the appellate tribunal a constitutional court with 
powers of judicial review has never been constituted despite statutory 
authorization the two seven year long civil war has ravaged the country s 
political and social institutions the un estimates of one eight million 
internally displaced persons idps while generally the accepted figure for war 
affected people is four million daily conditions of life throughout the country 
and specifically luanda population approximately four million mirror the 
collapse of administrative infrastructure as well as many social institutions 
the ongoing grave economic situation largely prevents any government support 
for social institutions hospitals are without medicines or basic equipment 
schools are without books and public employees often lack the basic supplies 
for their day to day work the president has announced the government s 
intention to hold elections in two zero zero six these elections would be the 
first since one nine nine two and would serve to elect both a new president and 
a new national assembly list of political parties in angola administrative 
divisions map of angola with the provinces numbered main article provinces of 
angola angola is divided into one eight provinces geography map of angola 
luanda the angolan capital main article geography of angola angola is bordered 
by namibia to the south zambia to the east the democratic republic of the congo 
to the north east and the south atlantic ocean to the west the exclave of 
cabinda also borders the republic of the congo to the north angola s capital 
luanda lies on the atlantic coast in the north west of the country angola is 
divided into an arid coastal strip stretching from namibia to luanda a wet 
interior highland a dry savanna in the interior south and southeast and rain 
forest in the north and in cabinda the zambezi river and several tributaries of 
the congo river have their sources in angola exclaves and enclaves the exclave 
province of cabinda borders with both the republic of the congo and the 
democratic republic of the congo the latter s only oceanic access six zero 
kilometres three seven mi in width divides angola from cabinda the population 
stands at around three zero zero zero zero zero two thirds of which inhabit the 
surroundings in a generally stable state on congolese and zairian territory the 
angolan central government has yet to put a definitive end to the cabindese 
secessionist movement economy main article economy of angola angola is an 
economy in disarray because of a quarter century of nearly continuous warfare 
despite its abundant natural resources output per capita is among the world s 
lowest subsistence agriculture provides the main livelihood for eight five of 
the population oil production and the supporting activities are vital to the 
economy contributing about four five to gdp and nine zero of exports control of 
the oil industry is consolidated in sonangol group a conglomerate which is 
owned by the angolan government notwithstanding the signing of a peace accord 
in november one nine nine four millions of land mines remain rural violence is 
a possibility and many farmers are reluctant to return to their fields as a 
result much of the country s food must still be imported despite the increase 
in the pace of civil warfare in late one nine nine eight the economy grew by an 
estimated four in one nine nine nine the government introduced new currency 
denominations in one nine nine nine including a one and five kwanza note 
expanded oil production brightens prospects for two zero zero zero but internal 
strife discourages investment outside of the petroleum sector with the advent 
of peace in two zero zero two a strategic partnership with china is set in 
motion so huge investments by chinese companies are now in place especially in 
the construction sector and more recently in the metallurgical sector 
demographics main article demographics of angola angola has three main ethnic 
groups each speaking a bantu language ovimbundu three seven kimbundu two five 
and bakongo one three other groups include chokwe or lunda ganguela nhaneca 
humbe ambo herero and xindunga in addition mesti os angolans of mixed european 
and african family origins amount to about two with a small one population of 
whites mainly ethnically portuguese portuguese make up the largest non angolan 
population with at least three zero zero zero zero though many native born 
angolans can claim portuguese nationality under portuguese law in one nine 
seven five two five zero zero zero zero cuban soldiers settled angola to help 
the mpla forces to fight for its independence these cubans are of european and 
asian mostly chinese descent while others include those of pure african and 
mulatto descent who has ancestors in angola but in one nine eight nine almost 
all cubans went out of the country after a peace agreement has been signed 
between angola cuba and south africa portuguese is both the official and 
predominant language spoken in the homes of about two thirds of the population 
and as a secondary language by many more cubans speak spanish language but 
almost none of their descendants speak it the great majority of the inhabitants 
are of bantu stock with some admixture in the congo district in the south east 
are various tribes of bushmen the best known of the bantu tribes are the ba 
kongo ba fiot who dwell chiefly in the north and the abunda mbunda ba bundo who 
occupy the central part of the province which takes its name from the ngola 
tribe of abunda another of these tribes the bangala living on the west bank of 
the upper kwango must not be confused with the bangala of the middle congo in 
the abunda is a considerable strain of portuguese blood the ba lunda inhabit 
the lunda district along the upper kunene and in other districts of the plateau 
are settlements of boers the boer population being about two zero zero zero in 
the coast towns the majority of the white inhabitants are portuguese the mushi 
kongo and other divisions of the ba kongo retain curious traces of the 
christianity professed by them in the one six th and one seven th centuries and 
possibly later crucifixes are used as potent fetish charms or as symbols of 
power passing down from chief to chief whilst every native has a santu or 
christian name and is dubbed dom or dona fetishism is the prevailing religion 
throughout the province the dwelling places of the natives are usually small 
huts of the simplest construction used chiefly as sleeping apartments the day 
is spent in an open space in front of the hut protected from the sun by a roof 
of palm or other leaves despite all that catholicism remains the dominant 
religion although recently an increasing number of churches are claiming more 
followers particularly evangelicals list of angolans culture main article 
culture of angola list of writers from angola contemporary dance company of 
angola stamps list of errors on portuguese ex colonies stamps of angola one 
nine one two list of errors on portuguese ex colonies stamps of angola one nine 
one four list of errors on portuguese ex colonies stamps of angola one nine two 
one list of birds on stamps of angola list of people on stamps of angola list 
of bonsai on stamps list of fish on stamps miscellaneous topics communications 
in angola foreign relations of angola list of angolan companies military of 
angola sonangol group transport in angola see also list of sovereign states 
reference much of the material in these articles comes from the cia world 
factbook two zero zero zero and the two zero zero three u s department of state 
website external links government republic of angola official government portal 
national assembly of angola official site in portuguese embassy of angola in 
washington dc government information and links news allafrica angola news 
headline links angola press government controlled news agency in portuguese 
french and english angonoticias in portuguese a popular news source in angola 
mangole in portuguese a full news source in angola and web directory of angolan 
sites online jornal de angola in portuguese a popular newspaper in angola 
overviews bbc country profile angola cia world factbook angola us state 
department angola includes background notes country study and major reports 
radio music site official de kizomba radio canal angola online directories 
columbia university libraries angola directory category of the www vl open 
directory project angola directory category stanford university africa south of 
the sahara angola directory category tourism other angola conflict briefing 
angola african union member states former portuguese colonies cplp member 
states map of angola angola is located on the south atlantic coast of west 
africa between namibia and the republic of the congo it also is bordered by the 
democratic republic of the congo and zambia to the east the country is divided 
into an arid coastal strip stretching from namibia to luanda a wet interior 
highland a dry savanna in the interior south and southeast and rain forest in 
the north and in cabinda the zambezi river and several tributaries of the congo 
river have their sources in angola the coastal strip is tempered by the cool 
benguela current resulting in a climate similar to coastal peru or baja 
california there is a short rainy season lasting from february to april summers 
are hot and dry while winters are mild the interior highlands have a mild 
climate with a rainy season from november through april followed by a cool dry 
season from may to october elevations generally range from three zero zero zero 
to six zero zero zero feet nine zero zero to one eight zero zero m the far 
north and cabinda enjoy rain throughout much of the year the coast is for the 
most part flat with occasional low cliffs and bluffs of red sandstone there is 
but one deep inlet of the sea great fish bay or ba a dos tigres farther north 
are port alexander little fish bay and lobito bay while shallower bays are 
numerous lobito bay has water sufficient to allow large ships to unload close 
inshore the coast plain extends inland for a distance varying from three zero 
to one zero zero miles four eight to one six five km this region is in general 
sparsely watered and somewhat sterile the approach to the great central plateau 
of africa is marked by a series of irregular terraces this intermediate 
mountain belt is covered with luxuriant vegetation water is fairly abundant 
though in the dry season obtainable only by digging in the sandy beds of the 
rivers the plateau has an altitude ranging from four zero zero zero to six zero 
zero zero ft one two zero zero to one eight zero zero m it consists of well 
watered wide rolling plains and low hills with scanty vegetation in the east 
the tableland falls away to the basins of the congo and zambezi to the south it 
merges into a barren sandy desert a large number of rivers make their way 
westward to the sea they rise mostly in the mountain belt and are unimportant 
the only two of any size being the kwanza and the kunene separately noticed the 
mountain chains which form the edge of the plateau or diversify its surface run 
generally parallel to the coast as tala mugongo four four zero zero ft one 
three five zero m chella and vissecua five two five zero ft to six five zero 
zero ft or one five zero zero to two zero zero zero m in the district of 
benguela are the highest points of the province viz loviti seven seven eight 
zero ft two three seven zero m in one two five s and mt elonga seven five five 
zero ft two three zero zero m south of the kwanza is the volcanic mountain 
caculo cabaza three three zero zero ft one zero zero zero m from the tableland 
the kwango and many other streams flow north to join the kasai river one of the 
largest affluents of the congo which in its upper course forms for fully three 
zero zero mi four nine zero km the boundary between angola and the congo state 
in the south east part of the province the rivers belong either to the zambezi 
system or like the okavango drain to lake ngami geology the rock formations of 
angola are met with in three distinct regions the littoral zone the median zone 
formed by a series of hills more or less parallel with the coast the central 
plateau the central plateau consists of ancient crystalline rocks with granites 
overlain by unfossiliferous sandstones and conglomerates of paleozoic age the 
outcrops are largely hidden under laterite the median zone is composed largely 
of crystalline rocks with granites and some palaeozoic unfossiliferous rocks 
the littoral zone contains the only fossiliferous strata these are of tertiary 
and cretaceous ages the latter rocks resting on a reddish sandstone of older 
date the cretaceous rocks of the dombe grande region near benguella are of 
albian age and belong to the acanthoceras mamillari zone the beds containing 
schloenbachia inflata are referable to the gault rocks of tertiary age are met 
with at dombe grande mossamedes and near loanda the sandstones with gypsum 
copper and sulfur of dombe are doubtfully considered to be of triassic age 
recent eruptive rocks mainly basalts form a line of hills almost bare of 
vegetation between benguella and mossamedes nepheline basalts and liparites 
occur at dombe grande the presence of gum copal in considerable quantities in 
the superficial rocks is characteristic of certain regions location southern 
africa bordering the south atlantic ocean between namibia and democratic 
republic of the congo geographic coordinates map references africa area total 
one two four six seven zero zero km land one two four six seven zero zero km 
water zero km area comparative australia comparative smaller than the northern 
territory canada comparative slightly smaller than the northwest territories 
united kingdom comparative five times bigger than the uk united states 
comparative slightly less than twice the size of texas capital luanda s o paulo 
de loanda port railhead major cities amboim porto amboim bailundo vila teixeira 
da silva benguela s o felipe de benguella port railhead ca la vila robert 
williams calandula duque de bragan a camacupa vila general machado chibia vila 
jo o de almeida ganda vila mariano machado huambo nova lisboa rail kuito silva 
porto kuvango vila da ponte lubango s da bandeira lwena vila luso massango 
forte rep blica mbanza congo s o salvador do congo menongue serpa pinto 
railhead namibe mo medes port railhead n dalatando vila salazar rail n giva 
vila pereira d e a saurimo vila henrique de carvalho soyo santo ant nio do 
zaire sumbe novo redondo tombua porto alexandre u je carmona other towns in 
angola land boundaries total five one nine eight km border countries democratic 
republic of the congo two five one one km of which two two zero km is the 
boundary of discontiguous cabinda province republic of the congo two zero one 
km namibia one three seven six km zambia one one one zero km coastline one six 
zero zero km maritime claims contiguous zone two four nautical miles four four 
five km exclusive economic zone two zero zero nautical miles three seven zero 
km territorial sea one two nautical miles two two km climate like the rest of 
tropical africa angola experiences distinct alternating rainy and dry seasons 
it is semiarid in south and along coast to luanda north has cool dry season may 
to october and hot rainy season november to april in the interior above three 
three zero zero ft one zero zero zero m the temperature and rainfall decrease 
the plateau climate is healthy and invigorating the mean annual temperature at 
s o salvador do congo is two two two c seven two five f at loanda two three 
three c seven four three f and at caconda one nine five c six seven two f the 
climate is greatly influenced by the prevailing winds which arc w s w and s s w 
two seasons are distinguished the cool from june to september and the rainy 
from october to may the heaviest rainfall occurs in april and is accompanied by 
violent storms terrain angola has three principal natural regions the coastal 
lowland characterized by low plains and terraces hills and mountains rising 
inland from the coast into a great escarpment and an area of high plains called 
the high plateau planalto which extends eastward from the escarpment the 
highest point in angola is morro de moco at two six two zero m coastal lowland 
the coastal lowland rises from the sea in a series of low terraces this region 
varies in width from about two five kilometers near benguela to more than one 
five zero kilometers in the cuanza river valley just south of angola s capital 
luanda and is markedly different from angola s highland mass the atlantic ocean 
s cold northwardflowing benguela current substantially reduces precipitation 
along the coast making the region relatively arid or nearly so south of 
benguela where it forms the northern extension of the namib desert and quite 
dry even in its northern reaches even where as around luanda the average annual 
rainfall may be as much as fifty centimeters it is not uncommon for the rains 
to fail given this pattern of precipitation the far south is marked by sand 
dunes which give way to dry scrub along the middle coast portions of the 
northern coastal plain are covered by thick brush hills and mountains the belt 
of hills and mountains parallels the coast at distances ranging from two zero 
kilometers to one zero zero kilometers inland the cuanza river divides the zone 
into two parts the northern part rises gradually from the coastal zone to an 
average elevation of five zero zero meters with crests as high as one zero zero 
zero meters to one eight zero zero meters south of the cuanza river the hills 
rise sharply from the coastal lowlands and form a high escarpment extending 
from a point east of luanda and running south through namibia the escarpment 
reaches two four zero zero meters at its highest point southeast of the town of 
sumbe and is steepest in the far south in the serra da chela mountain range 
high plateau the high plateau lies to the east of the hills and mountains and 
dominates angola s terrain the surface of the plateau is typically flat or 
rolling but parts of the benguela plateau and the humpata highland area of the 
hu la plateau in the south reach heights of two five zero zero meters and more 
the malanje plateau to the north rarely exceeds one zero zero zero meters in 
height the benguela plateau and the coastal area in the immediate environs of 
benguela and lobito the bi plateau the malanje plateau and a small section of 
the hu la plateau near the town of lubango have long been among the most 
densely settled areas in angola drainage most of the country s many rivers 
originate in central angola but their patterns of flow are diverse and their 
ultimate outlets varied a number of rivers flow in a more or less westerly 
course to the atlantic ocean providing water for irrigation in the dry coastal 
strip and the potential for hydroelectric power only some of which had been 
realized by one nine eight eight two of angola s most important rivers the 
cuanza and the cunene take a more indirect route to the atlantic the cuanza 
flowing north and the cunene flowing south before turning west the cuanza is 
the only river wholly within angola that is navigable for nearly two zero zero 
kilometers from its mouth by boats of commercially or militarily significant 
size the congo river whose mouth and western end form a small portion of angola 
s northern border with zaire is also navigable north of the lunda divide a 
number of important tributaries of the congo river flow north to join it 
draining angola s northeast quadrant south of the divide some rivers flow into 
the zambezi river and thence to the indian ocean others to the okavango river 
as the cubango river is called along the border with namibia and in botswana 
and thence to the okavango swamp in botswana the tributaries of the cubango 
river and several of the southern rivers flowing to the atlantic are seasonal 
completely dry much of the year land use and hazards natural resources 
petroleum diamonds iron ore phosphates copper feldspar gold bauxite uranium 
land use arable land two four one permanent crops zero four other nine seven 
one nine one nine nine nine est irrigated land seven five zero km one nine nine 
eight est natural hazards locally heavy rainfall causes periodic flooding on 
the plateau environment current issues overuse of pastures and subsequent soil 
erosion attributable to population pressures desertification deforestation of 
tropical rain forest in response to both international demand for tropical 
timber and to domestic use as fuel resulting in loss of biodiversity soil 
erosion contributing to water pollution and silting of rivers and dams 
inadequate supplies of potable water environment international agreements party 
to biodiversity climate change desertification law of the sea ozone layer 
protection ship pollution marpol seven three seven eight signed but not 
ratified none of the selected agreements flora and fauna both flora and fauna 
are those characteristic of the greater part of tropical africa as far south as 
benguela the coast region is rich in oil palms and mangroves in the northern 
part of the province are dense forests in the south towards the kunene are 
regions of dense thorn scrub rubber vines and trees are abundant but in some 
districts their number has been considerably reduced by the primitive methods 
adopted by native collectors of rubber the species most common are various root 
rubbers notably the carpodinus chylorrhiza this species and other varieties of 
carpodinus are very widely distributed landolphias are also found the coffee 
cotton and guinea pepper plants are indigenous and the tobacco plant flourishes 
in several districts among the trees are several which yield excellent timber 
such as the tacula pterocarpus tinctorius which grows to an immense size its 
wood being blood red in colour and the angola mahogany the bark of the musuemba 
albizzia coriaria is largely used in the tanning of leather the mulundo bears a 
fruit about the size of a cricket ball covered with a hard green shell and 
containing scarlet pips like a pomegranate the fauna includes the lion leopard 
cheetah elephant giraffe rhinoceros hippopotamus buffalo zebra kudu and many 
other kinds of antelope wildpig ostrich and crocodile among fish are the barbel 
bream and african yellow fish geography note the province of cabinda is an 
exclave separated from the rest of the country by the democratic republic of 
the congo extreme points this is a list of the extreme points of angola the 
points that are farther north south east or west than any other location angola 
northernmost point unnamed point on the border with republic of the congo north 
of the town caio bemba cabinda province an angolan exclave easternmost point 
unnamed location on a river section of the border with zambia north of the town 
sapeta in zambia moxico province southernmost point on the point where the 
cunene river section of the border with namibia terminates at the caprivi strip 
immediately north of the town andara in namibia cuando cubango province 
westernmost point ba a dos tigres island namibe province angola mainland 
northernmost point a point on the border with the democratic republic of congo 
immediately to the north west of the town luvo zaire province easternmost point 
unnamed point on a river section of the border with zambia north of the town 
sapeta in zambia moxico province southernmost point on the point where the 
cunene river section of the border with namibia terminates at the caprivi strip 
immediately north of the town andara in namibia cuando cubango province 
westernmost point unnamed headland west of tombua porto alexandre namibe 
sources library of congress country studies much of the material in this 
article comes from the cia world factbook two zero zero three and the two zero 
zero three u s department of state website see also angola extreme points of 
angola geography of angola geography by country demographics of angola data of 
fao year two zero zero five number of inhabitants in thousands the demographics 
of angola consist of three main ethnic groups each speaking a bantu language 
ovimbundu three seven kimbundu two five and bakongo one three other groups 
include chokwe or lunda ganguela nhaneca humbe ambo herero and xindunga in 
addition mixed racial european and africa people amount to about two with a 
small one population of whites mainly ethnically portuguese portuguese make up 
the largest non angolan population with at least three zero zero zero zero 
though many native born angolans can claim portuguese nationality under 
portuguese law in one nine seven five two five zero zero zero zero cuban 
soldiers settled angola to help the mpla forces to fight for its independence 
these cubans are of european and asian mostly chinese descent while others 
include those of pure african and mulatto descent who has ancestors in angola 
but in one nine eight nine almost all cubans went out of the country after a 
peace agreement has been signed between angola cuba and south africa cubans 
speak spanish language but almost none of their descendants speak it portuguese 
is both the official and predominant language the great majority of the 
inhabitants are of bantu negro stock with some admixture in the congo district 
with the pure negro type in the south east are various tribes of bushmen the 
best known of the bantu negro tribes are the ba kongo ba fiot who dwell chiefly 
in the north and the abunda mbunda ba bundo who occupy the central part of the 
province which takes its name from the ngola tribe of abunda another of these 
tribes the bangala living on the west bank of the upper kwango must not be 
confounded with the bangala of the middle congo in the abunda is a considerable 
strain of portuguese blood the ba lunda inhabit the lunda district along the 
upper kunene and in other districts of the plateau are settlements of boers the 
boer population being about two zero zero zero in the coast towns the majority 
of the white inhabitants are portuguese the mushi kongo and other divisions of 
the ba kongo retain curious traces of the christianity professed by them in the 
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries and possibly later crucifixes are used as 
potent fetish charms or as symbols of power passing down from chief to chief 
whilst every native has a santu or christian name and is dubbed dom or dona 
fetishism is the prevailing religion throughout the province the dwelling 
places of the natives are usually small huts of the simplest construction used 
chiefly as sleeping apartments the day is spent in an open space in front of 
the hut protected from the sun by a roof of palm or other leaves demographic 
data from the cia world factbook population pyramid for angola population one 
one one nine zero seven eight six july two zero zero five est age structure 
zero one four years four three four male two four five four two zero nine 
female two four zero seven zero eight three one five six four years five three 
seven male three zero five nine three three nine female two nine five five zero 
six zero six five years and over two eight male one three nine nine six one 
female one seven five one three four two zero zero five est median age total 
one eight one two years male one eight one two years female one eight one one 
years two zero zero five est population growth rate one nine two zero zero five 
est birth rate four four six four births one zero zero zero population two zero 
zero five est death rate two five nine deaths one zero zero zero population two 
zero zero five est net migration rate zero two eight migrant s one zero zero 
zero population two zero zero five est sex ratio at birth one zero five male s 
female under one five years one zero two male s female one five six four years 
one zero four male s female six five years and over zero eight male s female 
total population one zero two male s female two zero zero five est infant 
mortality rate total one nine one one nine deaths one zero zero zero live 
births male two zero three six eight deaths one zero zero zero live births 
female one seven eight zero seven deaths one zero zero zero live births two 
zero zero five est life expectancy at birth total population three six six one 
years male three six years female three seven two five years two zero zero five 
est total fertility rate six two seven children born woman two zero zero five 
est hiv aids adult prevalence rate three nine two zero zero three est people 
living with hiv aids two four zero zero zero zero two zero zero three est 
deaths two one zero zero zero two zero zero three est major infectious diseases 
degree of risk very high food or waterborne diseases bacterial and protozoal 
diarrhea hepatitis a typhoid fever vectorborne diseases malaria african 
trypanosomiasis sleeping sickness are high risks in some locations respiratory 
disease meningococcal meningitis water contact disease schistosomiasis two zero 
zero four nationality noun angolan s adjective angolan ethnic groups ovimbundu 
three seven kimbundu two five bakongo one three mestico mixed european and 
native african two european one other two two religions indigenous beliefs four 
seven roman catholic three eight protestant one five one nine nine eight est 
languages portuguese official bantu and other african languages literacy 
definition age one five and over can read and write total population four two 
male five six female two eight one nine nine eight est references much of the 
material in this article comes from the cia world factbook two zero zero five 
and the two zero zero three u s department of state website geography of angola 
angolan society demographics by country angola changed from a one party marxist 
leninist system ruled by the mpla to a formal multiparty democracy following 
the one nine nine two elections president dos santos won the first round 
election with more than four nine of the vote to jonas savimbi s four zero a 
runoff never has taken place the subsequent renewal of civil war and collapse 
of the lusaka protocol have left much of this process stillborn but democratic 
forms exist notably the national assembly currently political power is 
concentrated in the presidency the executive branch of the government is 
composed of the president the prime minister currently fernando da piedade dias 
dos santos and council of ministers the council of ministers composed of all 
government ministers and vice ministers meets regularly to discuss policy 
issues governors of the one eight provinces are appointed by and serve at the 
pleasure of the president the constitutional law of one nine nine two 
establishes the broad outlines of government structure and delineates the 
rights and duties of citizens the legal system is based on portuguese and 
customary law but is weak and fragmented courts operate in only one two of more 
than one four zero municipalities a supreme court serves as the appellate 
tribunal a constitutional court with powers of judicial review has never been 
constituted despite statutory authorization the two six year long civil war has 
ravaged the country s political and social institutions the un estimates of one 
eight million internally displaced persons idps while generally the accepted 
figure for war affected people is four million daily conditions of life 
throughout the country and specifically luanda population approximately four 
million mirror the collapse of administrative infrastructure as well as many 
social institutions the ongoing grave economic situation largely prevents any 
government support for social institutions hospitals are without medicines or 
basic equipment schools are without books and public employees often lack the 
basic supplies for their day to day work executive branch president jos eduardo 
dos santos mpla two one september one nine seven nine prime minister fernando 
da piedade dias dos santos nando mpla six december two zero zero two the 
president is elected for a five year term by the people the council of 
ministers appointed by the president legislative branch the national assembly 
assembleia nacional has two two zero members elected for a four year term one 
three zero members by proportional representation and nine zero members in 
provincial districts the next elections due for one nine nine seven have been 
put off indefinitely political parties and elections the president has 
announced the government s intention to hold elections in two zero zero six 
these elections would be the first since one nine nine two and would serve to 
elect both a new president and a new national assembly judicial branch supreme 
court or tribunal da relacao judges of the supreme court are appointed by the 
president administrative divisions angola has eighteen provinces provincias 
singular provincia bengo benguela bie cabinda cuando cubango cuanza norte 
cuanza sul cunene huambo huila luanda lunda norte lunda sul malanje moxico 
namibe uige zaire political pressure groups and leaders front for the 
liberation of the enclave of cabinda or flec n zita henriques tiago antonio 
bento bembe note flec is waging a small scale highly factionalized armed 
struggle for the independence of cabinda province international organization 
participation acp afdb ceeac eca fao g seven seven iaea ibrd icao icct 
signatory icftu icrm ida ifad ifc ifrcs ilo imf imo interpol ioc iom iso 
correspondent itu nam oas observer oau sadc un un security council temporary 
unctad unesco unido upu wco wftu who wipo wmo wtoo wtro politics of angola 
angola s is the fastest growing economy in africa largely due to a major oil 
boom but it also ranks in the bottom one zero of socioeconomic conditions in 
the world aside from the oil sector and diamonds it is in economic disarray 
because of two six years of nearly continuous warfare despite abundant natural 
resources output per capita remains among the world s lowest subsistence 
agriculture and dependence on humanitarian food assistance sustain the large 
majority of the population little industry exists by contrast the rapidly 
expanding petroleum industry now producing up to eight zero zero zero zero zero 
barrels one two seven zero zero zero m per day behind only nigeria in africa 
accounts for more than six zero of gnp and nine zero of government revenues oil 
production remains largely offshore and has few linkages with other sectors of 
the economy block zero located of the enclave of cabinda provides the majority 
of angola s crude oil production there chevrontexaco through its subsidiary 
cabinda gulf oil company is the operator with a three nine two share with 
sonangol the angolan state oil company total and eni agip splitting up the rest 
chevrontexaco also operates angola s first producing deepwater section block 
one four which started pumping in january two zero zero zero the u s takes more 
than half of angola s production by far the largest importer exports to asian 
countries have grown rapidly in recent years however especially china 
significant discoveries have been made on deepwater blocks one five one seven 
one eight and two four with exxonmobil bp statoil norsk hydro and agip having 
major interests total operates angola s one refinery in luanda as a joint 
venture with sonangol plans for a second refinery in lobito are moving forward 
in the last decade of the colonial period angola was a major african food 
exporter but now is forced to import almost all its food because of severe 
wartime conditions including extensive planting of landmines throughout the 
countryside agricultural activities have been brought to a near standstill some 
efforts to recover have gone forward however notably in fisheries coffee 
production though a fraction of its pre one nine seven five level is sufficient 
for domestic needs and some exports in sharp contrast to a bleak picture of 
devastation and bare subsistence is expanding oil production now almost half of 
gdp and nine zero of exports at eight zero zero zero zero zero barrels one two 
seven zero zero zero m a day diamonds make up most of the remaining exports and 
have provided much of the revenue for jonas savimbi s unita rebellion through 
illicit trade other rich resources await development gold forest products 
fisheries iron ore coffee and countless fruits an economic reform effort was 
launched in one nine nine eight in april two zero zero zero angola started an 
international monetary fund imf staff monitored program smp the program 
formally lapsed in june two zero zero one but the imf remains engaged in this 
context the government of angola has succeeded in unifying exchange rates and 
has raised fuel electricity and water rates the commercial code 
telecommunications law and foreign investment code are being modernized a 
privatization effort prepared with world bank assistance has begun with the bci 
bank nevertheless a legacy of fiscal mismanagement and corruption persists 
angola is the third largest trading partner of the united states in sub saharan 
africa largely because of its petroleum exports the u s imports about four of 
its oil from angola a share which should continue to increase by the same token 
u s companies account for more than half the investment in angola with chevron 
texaco leading the way the u s exports industrial goods and services primarily 
oilfield equipment mining equipment chemicals aircraft and food to angola while 
principally importing petroleum economy overview angola is an economy in 
disarray because of a quarter century of nearly continuous warfare and 
corruption despite its abundant natural resources output per capita is among 
the world s lowest subsistence agriculture provides the main livelihood for 
eight five of the population oil production and the supporting activities are 
vital to the economy contributing about four five to gdp and nine zero of 
exports notwithstanding the signing of a peace accord in november one nine nine 
four violence continues millions of land mines remain and many farmers are 
reluctant to return to their fields as a result much of the country s food must 
still be imported to take advantage of its rich resources gold diamonds 
extensive forests atlantic fisheries and large oil deposits angola will need to 
implement the peace agreement and reform government policies despite the 
increase in the pace of civil warfare in late one nine nine eight the economy 
grew by an estimated four in one nine nine nine the government introduced new 
currency denominations in one nine nine nine including a one and five kwanza 
note expanded oil production brightens prospects for two zero zero zero but 
internal strife discourages investment outside of the petroleum sector african 
union member economies communications in angola telephony telephone service is 
limited mostly to government and business use nine six three zero zero main 
lines were reported to be in use in two zero zero three and one three zero zero 
zero zero mobile cellular lines were reported in two zero zero two hf 
radiotelephone is used extensively for military links the domestic system 
consists of a limited system of wire it also uses microwave radio relay and 
tropospheric scatter the international country code for angola is two four four 
angola has two intelsat satellite earth stations for communications across the 
atlantic ocean fiber optic submarine cable sat three wasc provides connectivity 
to europe and asia radio broadcast stations am two one fm six shortwave seven 
two zero zero zero radios six three zero zero zero zero one nine nine seven 
television broadcast stations six two zero zero zero televisions one five zero 
zero zero zero one nine nine seven internet internet hosts one seven two zero 
zero three internet users two zero zero zero zero zero two zero zero two iso 
three one six six one alpha two country code ao reference cia world factbook 
two zero zero four communications in angola transportation in angola comprises 
railways total two seven six one km narrow gauge two six three eight km one 
zero six seven m gauge one two three km zero six zero zero m gauge two zero 
zero two there are three separate lines which do not link up a fourth system 
linked gunza and gabela railways in angola have suffered a lot of damage in the 
civil war and a four b project is proposed to restore the lines and even to 
extend the system a link to namibia is partly under construction railway links 
to adjacent countries the major railway in angola is the benguela railway 
severely damaged during the civil war after independence congo no lobito 
lubumbashi restoration link proposed namibia no same gauge links proposed and 
partially under construction in two zero zero five zambia no highways total 
seven six six two six km paved one nine one five six km unpaved five seven four 
seven zero km one nine nine seven est waterways one two nine five km navigable 
pipelines crude oil one seven nine km ports and harbors atlantic ocean from 
north to south ambriz cabinda luanda railhead for malanje lobito railhead for 
congo malongo namibe railhead for menongue porto amboim soyo merchant marine 
total eight ships one zero zero zero grt or over three zero three one one grt 
four eight nine two four dwt ships by type cargo seven petroleum tanker one two 
zero zero two est airports two four three two zero zero two airports with paved 
runways total three two over three zero four seven m four two four three eight 
to three zero four seven m eight one five two four to two four three seven m 
one four nine one four to one five two three m five under nine one four m one 
two zero zero two est airports with unpaved runways total two one one two zero 
zero two over three zero four seven m two two four three eight to three zero 
four seven m four one five two four to two four three seven m three zero nine 
one four to one five two three m nine five under nine one four m eight zero two 
zero zero two est national airline taag air angola reference this article comes 
from the cia world factbook two zero zero three see also angola transportation 
in angola angola s military is called the faa the portuguese acronym for 
angolan armed forces headed by a chief of staff who reports to the minister of 
defense there are three divisions the army navy marinha de guerra mdg and air 
and air defense forces fana total manpower is about one one zero zero zero zero 
the army is by far the largest of the services with about one zero zero zero 
zero zero men and women the navy numbers about three zero zero zero and 
operates several small patrol craft and barges air force personnel total about 
seven zero zero zero its equipment includes russian manufactured fighters and 
transport planes a small number of faa personnel are stationed in the 
democratic republic of the congo kinshasa and the republic of the congo 
brazzaville references cia world factbook two zero zero five u s department of 
state background notes two zero zero three military of angola militaries froom 
one nine seven five to one nine eight nine angola was aligned with the eastern 
bloc in particular the soviet union and cuba since then it has focused on 
improving relationships with western countries cultivating links with other 
portuguese speaking countries and asserting its own national interests in 
central africa through military and diplomatic intervention in one nine nine 
three it established formal diplomatic relations with the united states it has 
entered the southern african development community as a vehicle for improving 
ties with its largely anglophone neighbors to the south zimbabwe and namibia 
joined angola in its military intervention in the democratic republic of the 
congo where angolan troops remain in support of the joseph kabila government it 
also has intervened in the republic of the congo brazzaville to support the 
existing government in that country since one nine nine eight angola has 
successfully worked with the un security council to impose and carry out 
sanctions on unita more recently it has extended those efforts to controls on 
conflict diamonds the primary source of revenue for unita at the same time 
angola has promoted the revival of the community of portuguese speaking 
countries cplp as a forum for cultural exchange and expanding ties with 
portugal and brazil in particular disputes international angola gives shelter 
to thousands of refugees from the democratic republic of the congo while 
thousands of angolan refugees still remain in neighboring states as a 
consequence of the protracted civil wars in both states illicit drugs angola is 
used as a transshipment point for cocaine destined for western europe and other 
african states reference much of the material in this article comes from the 
cia world factbook two zero zero three and the two zero zero three u s 
department of state website foreign relations of angola albert sidney johnston 
albert sidney johnston february two one eight zero three april six one eight 
six two was a career u s army officer and a confederate general during the 
american civil war considered by confederate president jefferson davis to be 
the finest general in the confederacy he was killed early in the war at the 
battle of shiloh early life johnston was born in washington kentucky the 
youngest son of dr john and abigail harris johnston his father was a native of 
salisbury connecticut although albert johnston was born in kentucky he lived 
much of his life in texas which he considered his home he was educated at 
transylvania university in lexington and later secured an appointment to west 
point in one eight two six he graduated eighth in his class from the united 
states military academy with a commission as a second lieutenant in the two nd 
u s infantry he was assigned to posts in new york and missouri and served in 
the black hawk war in one eight three two as chief of staff to general henry 
atlinson in one eight two nine he married henrietta preston he resigned his 
commission in one eight three four to return to kentucky to care for his dying 
wife they had one son william preston johnston texas army in april one eight 
three four johnston took up farming in texas but enlisted as a private in the 
texas army during the texas war of independence against the republic of mexico 
in one eight three six one month later johnston was promoted to major and the 
position of aide de camp to general sam houston he was named adjutant general 
as a colonel in the republic of texas army on august five one eight three six 
on january three one one eight three seven he became senior brigadier general 
in command of the texas army on february seven one eight three seven he fought 
in a duel with texas brig gen felix huston challenging each other for the 
command of the texas army johnston refused to fire on huston and lost the 
position after he was wounded in the pelvis the second president of the 
republic of texas mirabeau b lamar appointed him secretary of war on december 
two two one eight three eight johnston was to provide the defense of the texas 
border against mexican invasion and in one eight three nine conducted a 
campaign against indians in northern texas in february one eight four zero he 
resigned and returned to kentucky where he married eliza griffin in one eight 
four three they settled on a large plantation he named china grove in brazoria 
county texas u s army johnston returned to the texas army during the mexican 
american war under general zachary taylor as a colonel of the one st texas 
rifle volunteers the enlistments of his volunteers ran out just before the 
battle of monterrey johnston managed to convince a few volunteers to stay and 
fight as he himself served as the inspector general of volunteers and fought at 
the battles of monterrey and buena vista johnston remained on his plantation 
after the war until he was appointed by president zachary taylor to the u s 
army as a major and was made a paymaster in december of one eight four nine he 
served in that role for more than five years making six tours and traveling 
more than four zero zero zero miles annually on the indian frontier of texas he 
served on the texas frontier and elsewhere in the west in one eight five five 
president franklin pierce appointed him colonel of the two nd now five th 
cavalry a new regiment which he organized as a key figure in the utah war he 
led u s troops who established a non mormon government in the formerly mormon 
territory he received a brevet promotion to brigadier general in one eight five 
seven for his service in utah he spent one eight six zero in kentucky until 
december two one when he sailed for california to take command of the 
department of the pacific civil war at the outbreak of the civil war johnston 
was the commander of the u s army department of the pacific in california he 
was approached by some californians who urged him to take his forces east to 
join the union against the confederacy he resigned his commission april nine 
one eight six one as soon as he heard of the secession of texas he remained in 
california until june after a rapid march through the deserts of arizona and 
texas he reached richmond virginia on or about september one one eight six one 
there johnston was appointed a general by his friend jefferson davis on may 
three zero one eight six one johnston became the second highest ranking 
confederate general after the little known samuel cooper as commander of the 
western department he raised the army of mississippi to defend confederate 
lines from the mississippi river to kentucky and the allegheny mountains 
although the confederate army won a morale boosting victory at first bull run 
in the east in one eight six one matters in the west turned ugly by early one 
eight six two johnston s subordinate generals lost fort henry on february six 
one eight six two and fort donelson on february one six one eight six two to 
union brig gen ulysses s grant johnston has been faulted for poor judgment in 
selecting gens tilghman and floyd for those crucial positions and for not 
supervising adequate construction of the forts and union maj gen don carlos 
buell captured the vital city of nashville tennessee gen p g t beauregard was 
sent west to join johnston and they organized their forces at corinth 
mississippi planning to ambush grant s forces at pittsburg landing tennessee 
shiloh johnston concentrated many of his forces from around the theater and 
launched a massive surprise attack against grant at the battle of shiloh on 
april six one eight six two as the confederate forces overran the union camps 
johnston seemed to be everywhere personally leading and rallying troops up and 
down the line at about two three zero p m while leading one of those charges he 
was wounded taking a bullet behind his right knee he did not think the wound 
serious at the time and sent his personal physician to attend to some wounded 
union soldiers instead the bullet had in fact clipped his popliteal artery and 
his boot was filling up with blood within a few minutes johnston was observed 
by his staff to be nearly fainting off of his horse and asked him if he was 
wounded to which he replied yes and i fear seriously it is possible that 
johnston s duel in one eight three seven had caused nerve damage or numbness to 
that leg and that he did not feel the wound to his leg as a result johnston was 
taken to a small ravine where he bled to death in minutes ironically it is 
probable that a confederate soldier fired the fatal round no union soldiers 
were observed to have ever gotten behind johnston during the fatal charge while 
it is known that many confederates were firing at the union lines while 
johnston charged well in advance of his soldiers he was the highest ranking 
casualty of the war and his death was a strong blow to the morale of the 
confederacy jefferson davis considered him the best general in the country this 
was two months before the emergence of robert e lee as their pre eminent 
general epitaph johnston was buried in new orleans louisiana in one eight six 
six a joint resolution of the texas legislature was passed to have his body 
reinterred to the texas state cemetery in austin the re interment occurred in 
one eight six seven four decades later the state appointed elisbet ney to 
design a monument and sculpture of him to be erected at his gravesite the texas 
historical commission has erected a historical marker near the entrance of what 
was once his plantation an adjacent marker was erected by the san jacinto 
chapter of the daughters of the republic of texas and the lee roberts and davis 
chapter of the united daughters of the confederate states of america references 
eicher john h the alamo and the texas war for independence da capo press isbn 
zero three zero six eight one zero four zero nine roland charles p albert 
sidney johnston soldier of three republics austin one nine six four one eight 
zero three births one eight six two deaths american civil war generals american 
civil war people confederate army generals history of texas people from texas 
texas united states army officers west point graduates the arctic ocean located 
mostly in the north polar region is the smallest of the world s five oceans and 
the shallowest even though iho recognizes it as an ocean oceanographers may 
call it the arctic mediterranean sea or simply the arctic sea classifying it as 
one of the mediterranean seas of the atlantic ocean geography arctic ocean the 
arctic ocean occupies a roughly circular basin and covers an area of about one 
four zero nine zero zero zero zero km five four four zero zero zero zero mi 
slightly less than one five times the size of the us the coastline length is 
four five three eight nine km nearly landlocked it is surrounded by the land 
masses of eurasia north america greenland and a number of islands it includes 
baffin bay barents sea beaufort sea chukchi sea east siberian sea greenland sea 
hudson bay hudson strait kara sea laptev sea white sea and other tributary 
bodies of water it is connected to the pacific ocean by the bering strait and 
to the atlantic ocean through the greenland sea an underwater ocean ridge the 
lomonosov ridge divides the arctic ocean into two basins the eurasian or nansen 
basin which is between four zero zero zero and four five zero zero m one three 
zero zero zero and one five zero zero zero ft deep and the north american or 
hyperborean basin which is about four zero zero zero m deep the topography of 
the ocean bottom is marked by fault block ridges plains of the abyssal zone 
ocean deeps and basins the average depth of the arctic ocean is one zero three 
eight m three four zero seven ft in part due to the large extent of continental 
shelf extant on the eurasian side the arctic ocean is used by both marine 
mammals and nuclear submarines the greatest inflow of water comes from the 
atlantic by way of the norwegian current which then flows along the eurasian 
coast water also enters from the pacific via the bering strait the east 
greenland current carries the major outflow temperature and salinity vary 
seasonally as the ice cover melts and freezes ice covers most of the ocean 
surface year round causing subfreezing temperatures much of the time the arctic 
is a major source of very cold air that inevitably moves toward the equator 
meeting with warmer air in the middle latitudes and causing rain and snow 
little marine life exists where the ocean surface is covered with ice 
throughout the year marine life abounds in open areas especially the more 
southerly waters the ocean s major ports are the russian cities of murmansk and 
arkhangelsk archangel the arctic ocean is important as the shortest air route 
between the pacific coast of north america and europe overflies it major 
chokepoint is the southern chukchi sea northern access to the pacific ocean via 
the bering strait strategic location between north america and russia shortest 
marine link between the extremes of eastern and western russia floating 
research stations operated by the us and russia maximum snow cover in march or 
april about two zero to five zero centimeters over the frozen ocean snow cover 
lasts about one zero months geographic coordinates climate extent of the arctic 
ice pack in september one nine seven eight two zero zero two extent of the 
arctic ice pack in february one nine seven eight two zero zero two polar 
climate characterized by persistent cold and relatively narrow annual 
temperature ranges winters characterized by continuous darkness cold and stable 
weather conditions and clear skies summers characterized by continuous daylight 
damp and foggy weather and weak cyclones with rain or snow there is 
considerable seasonal variation in how much pack ice covers the arctic ocean 
elevation extremes lowest point fram basin four six six five m according to the 
arctic ocean s eurasian basin deepest point is at five four five zero m one 
seven eight eight one ft highest point sea level zero m natural resources oil 
and gas fields placer deposits polymetallic nodules sand and gravel aggregates 
fish marine mammals seals and whales the political dead zone near the center of 
the sea is also at the center of a mounting dispute between the united states 
russia canada norway and denmark it is considered significant because of its 
potential to contain as much as or more than a quarter of the world s oil and 
gas resources the tapping of which could greatly alter the flow of the global 
energy market the arctic s new gold rush bbc natural hazards ice islands 
occasionally break away from northern ellesmere island icebergs calved from 
glaciers in western greenland and extreme northeastern canada permafrost on 
islands virtually ice locked from october to june ships subject to 
superstructure icing from october to may environment current issues endangered 
marine species include walruses and whales fragile ecosystem slow to change and 
slow to recover from disruptions or damage thinning polar icepack seasonal hole 
in ozone layer over the north pole reduction of the area of arctic sea ice will 
have an effect on the planet s albedo thus possibly affecting global warming 
many scientists are presently concerned that warming temperatures in the arctic 
may cause large amounts of fresh arctic ocean meltwater to enter the north 
atlantic possibly disrupting global ocean current patterns potentially severe 
changes in the earth s climate might then ensue ports and harbors arctic ocean 
seaports churchill inuvik prudhoe bay barrow pevek tiksi dikson dudinka 
arkhangelsk murmansk churchill manitoba canada inuvik canada prudhoe bay us 
barrow us pevek russia tiksi russia dikson russia dudinka russia murmansk 
russia arkhangelsk russia kirkenes norway vard norway transportation note 
sparse network of air ocean river and land routes the northwest passage north 
america and northern sea route eurasia are important seasonal waterways 
exploration the first surface crossing of the arctic ocean was led by wally 
herbert in one nine six nine in a dogsled expedition from alaska to svalbard 
with air support see also northwest passage open polar sea references 
bibliography neatby leslie h discovery in russian and siberian waters one nine 
seven three isbn zero eight two one four zero one two four six ray l and 
stonehouse b eds the arctic ocean one nine eight two isbn zero three three 
three three one zero one seven nine thor n ragnar v a picture atlas of the 
arctic one nine six nine isbn zero eight two one four zero one two four six 
based on public domain text by us naval oceanographer http oceanographer navy 
mil arctic html see also north pole external links arctic council the northern 
forum arctic environmental atlas interactive map of the greater arctic 
including shaded relief and bathymetry of the arctic ocean noaa arctic theme 
page comprehensive arctic resource with data photos maps essays on key arctic 
issues and much more noaa in situ ocean data viewer plot and download ocean 
observations arctic time series the unaami data collection viewable 
interdisciplinary diverse collection of arctic variables from different 
geographic regions and data types noaa north pole web cam images from web cams 
deployed in spring on an ice floe in the middle of the arctic ocean noaa near 
realtime north pole weather data data from instruments deployed on an ice floe 
in the middle of the arctic ocean search for arctic life heats up by stephen 
leahy oceans seas arctic the android data portrayed by brent spiner from the tv 
series star trek the next generation an android is an artificially created 
robot an automaton that resembles a human being usually both in appearance and 
behavior the word derives from the greek andr meaning man male and the suffix 
eides used to mean of the species alike from eidos species the word droid a 
robot in the star wars universe is derived from this meaning in the semantic 
sense the word android is a misnomer the intended meaning is an artificial 
human being like being while the literal translation is an artificial male 
being the word andros has definite meaning of male human being in greek while 
the word man can mean either male human being or human being in general the 
gender neutral word for human being in greek is anthropos and the correct word 
for an artificial human being like automaton would be anthropoid toc usage and 
distinctions unlike the terms robot a mechanical being and cyborg a being that 
is partly organic and partly mechanical the word android has been used in 
literature and other media to denote several different kinds of artificially 
constructed beings a robot that closely resembles a human a cyborg that closely 
resembles a human an artificially created yet primarily organic being that 
closely resembles a human although human morphology is not necessarily the 
ideal form for working robots the fascination in developing robots that can 
mimic it can be found historically in the assimilation of two concepts 
simulacra devices that exhibit likeness and automata devices that have 
independence the term android was first used by the french author mathias 
villiers de l isle adam one eight three eight one eight eight nine in his work 
tomorrow s eve featuring an artificial human like robot named hadaly as said by 
the officer in the story in this age of realien advancement who knows what goes 
on in the mind of those responsible for these mechanical dolls although karel 
apek s robots in r u r rossum s universal robots one nine two one the play that 
introduced the word robot to the world were organic artificial humans the word 
robot has come to primarily refer to mechanical humans animals and other beings 
the term android can mean either one of these while a cyborg cybernetic 
organism or bionic man would be a creature that is a combination of organic and 
mechanical parts ambiguity historically science fiction authors have used 
android in a greater diversity of ways than the terms robot and cyborg in some 
fiction works the primary difference between a robot and android is only skin 
deep with androids being made to look almost exactly like humans on the outside 
but with internal mechanics exactly the same as that of robots in other stories 
authors have defined android to indicate a wholly organic yet artificial 
creation other definitions of android fall somewhere in between the character 
data from the television series star trek the next generation is described as 
an android data became intoxicated in an early episode the naked now and is 
later referred to having bioplast sheeting for skin the most toys perhaps 
suggesting that he was initially intended by the writers to be at least 
partially organic otherwise data was shown to be mechanical throughout and this 
often became a central plot theme the replicants from the movie blade runner 
were bioengineered organic beings while they were not referred to as either 
robots or androids in the movie the screenplay was originally based on a novel 
by philip k dick called do androids dream of electric sheep in the video game 
beneath a steel sky genetically engineered androids similar to blade runner s 
replicants are a central plot theme however despite their organic makeup their 
behavior is programmed by computer the robots of apek s r u r were organic in 
nature today an author writing a similar story might very well be inclined to 
call them androids the character ash in the movie alien another artificial 
organic being is often referred to as an android though not in the dialogue of 
the movie itself similarly the character bishop in aliens and alien is a more 
advanced android commonly called a synthetic but prefers to be called an 
artificial person much later in the series timeline the character call in alien 
resurrection is ashamed of being an android c three po and r two d two from the 
star wars movies are referred to as droids while c three po could reasonably be 
called an android because he is humanoid in appearance the squat cylinder r two 
d two is only humanoid in behavior in the movie a i the robotic characters are 
called mechanoids but the film is loosely based on a short story written by 
brian aldiss called supertoys last all summer long in which the central 
character david is called an android by which aldiss seemed to be referring to 
an organic creation in the anime manga chobits androids are known as persicoms 
essentially computers in a man made body the series does not go into their 
internal composition but it is assumed to be artificial with a very realistic 
outside one of the key points of this series was a special type of persicom 
named a chobit a persicom that had free will and the ability to fall in love 
and have emotions androids in fiction thus far androids have remained mostly 
within the domain of science fiction and frequently in film and television 
however some humanoid robots exist one of the earliest android characters is 
otho from the captain future stories of edmond hamilton otho s construction is 
never discussed but he is much more human like than his companion grag a 
mechanical robot isaac asimov s robot stories are mostly about androids many 
are collected in i robot one nine five zero they promulgated a set of rules of 
ethics for androids and robots see three laws of robotics that greatly 
influenced other writers and thinkers in their treatment of the subject most of 
asimov s robots appear too artificial to be mistaken for human beings with the 
notable exceptions of r jander panell r daneel olivaw and andrew martin perhaps 
the most famous android is data played by actor brent spiner of the series star 
trek the next generation one nine eight seven one nine nine four and several 
spin off motion pictures this character was largely inspired by another android 
character created by gene roddenberry for the questor tapes data s immediate 
family brothers lore and b four et al daughter lal and mother dr juliana tainer 
were also androids and the fembots are properly though rarely referred to as 
gynoids from the same creator dr noonien soong earlier in star trek the motion 
picture one nine seven nine the ilia probe a precisely duplicated biomechanical 
drone of lieutenant ilia with some of her emotions intact was dispatched by v 
ger to gather information about the crew of the starship enterprise in the tv 
series gene roddenberry s andromeda two zero zero zero two zero zero five the 
gynoid rommie is an extension of the starship s ai operating system represented 
by an avatar of rommie in the re imagined series battlestar galactica two zero 
zero three the gynoid number six is one of a seductive variant of the 
antagonistic robotic cylons that is used to infiltrate the fleeing human 
colonial forces and particularly the mind of the scientist dr gaius baltar 
androids jinzou ningen in japanese meaning artificial human are also a race in 
dragon ball dragon ball z and dragon ball gt the androids names were only 
numbers such as android one three or android two zero they were created by dr 
gero dr muu and the red ribbon army some are entirely artificial and some are 
created from humans and can be considered cyborgs jinzo ningen kikaider was the 
first manga and tokusatsu series to feature an android protagonist the series 
xenosaga borrows villiers original term realian when referring to a race of 
beings created by vector corporation two playable characters are androids momo 
and kos mos one is refered to as a realian while the second is simply an 
android in their respective series by capcom mega man was initially called a 
humanoid which was then simplified to robot x a later version is said to be 
more advanced more independent of thought and closer to an android other beings 
based off his design are called reploids many more examples may be found in 
this list of fictional robots references kerman judith b one nine nine one 
retrofitting blade runner issues in ridley scott s blade runner and philip k 
dick s do androids dream of electric sheep bowling green oh bowling green state 
university popular press isbn zero eight seven nine seven two five zero nine 
five shelde per one nine nine three androids humanoids and other science 
fiction monsters science and soul in science fiction films new york new york 
university press isbn zero eight one four seven seven nine three zero one 
sidney perkowitz two zero zero four digital people from bionic humans to 
androids joseph henry press isbn zero three zero nine zero nine six one nine 
seven see also animatronic cyborg domestic robot muscle wire robot sex doll 
realdoll statuephilia gynoid artificial intelligence humanoid humanoid robot 
transhumanism repliee q one external links android world valerie the domestic 
female android science fiction themes robots alberta is one of canada s 
provinces it celebrated one zero zero years as a province on september one two 
zero zero five alberta is located in western canada it is bounded on the west 
by the province of british columbia on the north by the northwest territories 
on the east by the province of saskatchewan and on the south by the united 
states of america state of montana alberta s capital is the city of edmonton 
located just south of the centre of the province the most populous city and 
metropolitan area is calgary calgary is also the province s busiest 
transportation hub for road air and rail and is one of canada s major commerce 
centres other major municipalities include red deer lethbridge medicine hat 
fort mcmurray grande prairie camrose lloydminster wetaskiwin banff and jasper 
see also list of communities in alberta the premier of the province is hon 
ralph klein progressive conservative see also list of alberta premiers alberta 
is named after princess louise caroline alberta one eight four eight one nine 
three nine the fourth daughter of queen victoria princess louise was also the 
wife of sir john campbell who was the governor general of canada from one eight 
seven eight one eight eight three lake louise was also named in honour of 
princess louise geography main article geography of alberta alberta is in 
western canada and covers an area of six six one one nine zero km two five five 
two eight seven mi to the south it borders the us state of montana at a 
latitude of four nine n or the four nine th parallel to the east at a longitude 
of one one zero w it borders the province of saskatchewan at six zero n it is 
bordered by the northwest territories to the west its border with british 
columbia follows the line of peaks of the rocky mountains range along the 
continental divide which runs northwesterly until it reaches one two zero w at 
which point the border follows this meridian to six zero n with the exception 
of the southeastern section the province is well watered alberta contains 
dozens of rivers and lakes ideal for swimming water skiing fishing and a full 
range of other water sports there are a multitude of fresh water lakes each 
less than two six zero km situated in alberta and three of more considerable 
size these three larger lakes are lake athabasca seven eight nine eight km part 
of which lies in the province of saskatchewan lake claire one four three six km 
which lies just west of lake athabasca in wood bufflao national park and lesser 
slave lake one one six eight km which is well northwest of edmonton as alberta 
extends for one two zero zero km from north to south and about six zero zero km 
wide at its greatest east west extent it is natural that the climate should 
vary considerably between the four nine th and six zero th parallels it is also 
further influenced by altitude especially in the southwestern part of the 
province within the canadian rockies and adjacent areas directly to the east 
banff national park northern alberta is mostly covered by boreal forest and has 
fewer frost free days than southern alberta which is often semi arid due to the 
summer heat and much lower rainfall western alberta is protected by the 
mountains and enjoys the warmth brought by winter chinook winds while 
southeastern alberta is flat dry prairie where temperatures can range from very 
cold three five c three one f in the winter to very hot three five c nine five 
f or higher in the summer central and parts of northwestern alberta in the 
peace river region are largely aspen parkland a biome transitional between 
prairie to the south and boreal forest to the north after southern ontario 
central alberta is the most likely region in canada to experience tornadoes 
thunderstorms some of them severe are frequent in the summer especially in 
central and southern alberta the region surrounding the calgary edmonton 
corridor is notable for having the highest frequency of hail in canada overall 
alberta has cold winters with a daytime average of about one zero c one four f 
in the south to two four c one two f in the north in the summer the daytime 
temperature averages from about one three c five five f in the rocky mountains 
to one nine c six seven f in the dry prairie to the south east the northern and 
western parts of the province experience higher rainfall and lower evaporation 
rates caused by cooler summer temperatures alberta s capital city edmonton is 
located almost in the geographic centre of the province and most of alberta s 
oil is refined here southern alberta where calgary is located is known for its 
ranching much of the unforested part of alberta is given over either to grain 
or to dairy farming with ranching predominantly a southern alberta industry in 
southeastern alberta where the red deer river traverses the flat prairie and 
farmland are the alberta badlands with deep gorges and striking landforms 
dinosaur provincial park near drumheller alberta showcases the badlands terrain 
desert flora and remnants from alberta s past when dinosaurs roamed the then 
lush landscape alberta is one of only two canadian provinces to have no 
maritime coast the other being the neighbouring province of saskatchewan 
largest municipalities and metro areas by population major municipalities of 
alberta municipality two zero zero five two zero zero one one nine nine six 
census metropolitan areas calgary cma one zero six zero three zero zero nine 
five one three nine five eight two one six two eight edmonton cma one zero one 
six zero zero zero nine three seven eight four five eight six two five nine 
seven cities one zero largest calgary nine five six zero seven eight eight 
seven eight eight six six seven six eight zero eight two edmonton seven one two 
three nine one six six six one zero four six one six three zero six red deer 
seven nine zero eight two six seven seven zero seven six zero zero eight zero 
lethbridge seven seven two zero two six seven three seven four six three zero 
five three st albert included in edmonton cma five six three one eight five 
three zero eight one four six eight eight eight medicine hat five six zero four 
eight five one two four nine four six seven eight three grande prairie four 
four six three one three six nine eight three three one three five three 
airdrie included in calgary cma two seven zero six nine two zero three eight 
two one five nine four six spruce grove included in edmonton cma one eight four 
zero five one five nine eight three one four two seven one camrose one five 
eight five zero one four eight five four one three seven two eight districts 
three largest strathcona county included in edmonton cma eight zero two three 
two seven one nine eight six six four one seven six regional municipality of 
wood buffalo seven three one seven six four one four six six three five two one 
three municipality of rocky view included in calgary cma three zero six eight 
eight two eight four four one two three three two six calgary alberta sources 
all two zero zero five figures are based on official two zero zero five census 
data from municipalities where no two zero zero five data is available 
indicates the most recent official data from either the municipality or the two 
zero zero one statistics canada federal census all data for two zero zero one 
and one nine nine six is from the respective federal census indicates two zero 
zero five cma estimates according to statistics canada population of census 
metropolitan areas although the city of lloydminster has a total population of 
two three six three two it is not included on the list because the city 
straddles the alberta saskatchewan border only one five four eight seven people 
live on the alberta side which would make it alberta s one one th largest city 
industry main article industry in alberta alberta is the largest producer of 
conventional crude oil synthetic crude natural gas and gas products in the 
country two of the largest producers of petrochemicals in north america are 
located in central and north central alberta in both red deer and edmonton 
world class polyethylene and vinyl manufacturers produce products shipped all 
over the world and edmonton s oil refineries provide the raw materials for a 
large petrochemical industry to the east of edmonton the athabasca oil sands 
previously known as the athabasca tar sands have estimated oil reserves in 
excess of that of the rest of the world estimated to be one six trillion 
barrels two five four km with the advancement of extraction methods bitumen and 
economical synthetic crude are produced at costs nearing that of conventional 
crude this technology is alberta grown and developed many companies employ both 
conventional strip mining and non conventional methods to extract the bitumen 
from the athabasca deposit with current technology only three one five billion 
barrels five zero km are recoverable fort mcmurray one of canada s youngest and 
liveliest cities has grown up entirely because of the large multinational 
corporations which have taken on the task of oil production another factor 
determining the viability of oil extraction from the tar sands is the price of 
oil in two zero zero five record oil prices have made it more than profitable 
to extract this oil which in the past would give little profit or even a loss 
while edmonton is considered the pipeline junction manufacturing chemical 
processing research and refining centre of the province calgary is known for 
its senior and junior oil company head offices unlike edmonton calgary is not 
close to any large sources of oil with concerted effort and support from the 
provincial government several high tech industries have found their birth in 
alberta notably the invention and perfection of liquid crystal display systems 
with a growing economy alberta has several financial institutions dealing with 
several civil and private funds agriculture and forestry farm buildings alberta 
canola field grain elevator alberta agriculture has a significant position in 
the province s economy over five million cattle are residents of the province 
at one time or another and alberta beef has a healthy worldwide market nearly 
one half of all canadian beef is produced in alberta alberta is one of the 
prime producers of plains buffalo bison for the consumer market sheep for wool 
and mutton are also raised wheat and canola are primary farm crops with alberta 
leading the provinces in spring wheat production with other grains also 
prominent much of the farming is dryland farming often with fallow seasons 
interspersed with cultivation continuous cropping in which there is no fallow 
season is gradually becoming a more common mode of production because of 
increased profits and a reduction of soil erosion across the province the once 
common grain elevator is slowly being lost as rail lines are decreased and 
farmers now truck the grain to central points alberta is the leading beekeeping 
province of canada with some beekeepers wintering hives indoors in specially 
designed barns in southern alberta then migrating north during the summer into 
the peace river valley where the season is short but the working days are long 
for honeybees to produce honey from clover and fireweed hybrid canola also 
requires bee pollination and some beekeepers service this need the vast 
northern forest reserves of softwood allow alberta to produce large quantities 
of lumber and plywood and several northern alberta plants supply north america 
and the pacific rim nations with bleached wood pulp and newsprint government 
see also politics of alberta edmonton is the seat of government of alberta it 
is a parliamentary democracy its unicameral legislature the legislative 
assembly consists of eight three members as canada s head of state queen 
elizabeth ii is the government of alberta s chief executive her duties in 
alberta are carried out by lieutenant governor norman kwong the government is 
headed by the premier ralph klein the city of edmonton is alberta s government 
capital the province s revenue comes mainly from the taxation of oil natural 
gas beef softwood lumber and wheat but also includes grants from the federal 
government primarily for infrastructure projects albertans are the lowest taxed 
people in canada and alberta is the only province in canada without a 
provincial sales tax though residents are still subject to the federal sales 
tax the gst alberta s municipalities have their own governments which usually 
work in co operation with the provincial government alberta s politics are much 
more conservative than those of other canadian provinces alberta has 
traditionally had three political parties the progressive conservatives 
conservatives or tories the centrist liberals and the social democratic new 
democrats a fourth party the strongly conservative social credit party was a 
power in alberta for many decades but fell from the political map after the 
progressive conservatives came to power in the early one nine seven zero s 
since that time no other political party has governed alberta in fact only 
three parties have governed alberta the united farmers of alberta the social 
credit party and the currently governing progressive conservative party as is 
the case with many western canadian provinces alberta has had occasional bouts 
of separatist sentiment even during the one nine eight zero s when these 
feelings were at their strongest there has never been enough interest in 
secession to initiate any major movements or referenda there are a number of 
groups wishing to promote the independence of alberta in some form currently 
active in the province see also alberta separatism in the two zero zero four 
provincial election held in november the alberta alliance party running to the 
right wing politics of the conservatives won one seat see also list of alberta 
premiers list of alberta general elections education as with any canadian 
province the alberta government is the highest authority in education creating 
and regulating the school boards public colleges universities and other 
educational institutions k one two the vast majority of alberta s schools are 
run by publicly funded school boards each with its own district of authority 
the largest are english language public school boards alberta also has english 
separate catholic boards throughout the province which serve a substantial 
minority of students there is one protestant school board in part of the 
province where numbers warrant there are francophone school boards public and 
separate catholic all five of these types of boards are primarily publicly 
funded basic school fees range from two zero zero seven five zero depending on 
the school board by local property taxes and provincial grants given on an 
equal per student basis by the province with some adjustments the different 
types of school boards are a necessity under the canadian constitution which 
guarantees the francophones and catholic communities both the right to their 
own schools and the right to administer them some other canadian provinces have 
reformed their school systems on non religious lines by seeking a 
constitutional amendment but alberta has not often the decision to go to one 
system or another is not based on religion but a parent s belief of which 
system provides a better education starting in one nine nine four the province 
has allowed some chartered schools to operate independently of any district 
school board reporting directly to the province homeschooling is officially 
recognized and partially funded from within the alberta school system 
originally in alberta school boards had the power to levy property taxes within 
their respective districts however this meant districts with a low tax base 
were underfunded so the province moved to a system that pools the education 
property tax and distributes it based on student population and need post 
secondary alberta s oldest and largest university is edmonton s university of 
alberta the university of calgary once affiliated with the university of 
alberta gained its autonomy in one nine six six and is now the second largest 
university in alberta there is also athabasca university which focuses on 
distance learning and the university of lethbridge there are one five colleges 
that receive direct public funding along with two technical institutes nait and 
sait students may also receive government loans and grants while attending 
selected private institutions transportation alberta has over one eight zero 
zero zero zero km of highways and roads of which nearly five zero zero zero 
zero km are paved the main north south corridor is highway two which begins 
south of cardston at the carway border crossing highway four which effectively 
extends u s interstate highway one five into alberta and is the busiest u s 
gateway to the province begins at the coutts border crossing and ends at 
lethbridge highway three joins lethbridge to fort macleod and links highway 
four to highway two highway two travels northward through fort macleod calgary 
red deer and edmonton before dividing into two highways one continues northwest 
as highway four three into grande prairie and the peace river country the other 
highway six three travels northeast to fort mcmurray the location of the 
athabasca oil sands highway two is supplimented by two more highways that run 
parallel to it highway two two west of highway two known as the cowboy trail 
and highway two one east of highway two alberta has two main east west 
corridors the southern corridor part of the trans canada highway system enters 
the province near medicine hat runs westward through calgary and leaves alberta 
through banff national park the northern corridor also part of the trans canada 
network but known alternatively as the yellowhead highway highway one six runs 
west from lloydminster in eastern alberta through edmonton and jasper national 
park into british columbia on a sunny spring or fall day one of the most scenic 
drives in the world is along the icefields parkway which runs some three zero 
zero km between jasper and banff with mountain ranges and glaciers on either 
side of its entire length urban stretches of alberta s major highways and 
freeways are often called trails for example highway two is deerfoot trail as 
it passes through calgary calgary trail as it leaves edmonton southbound and st 
albert trail as it leaves edmonton northbound toward the city of st albert 
visitors from outside alberta often find this disconcerting accustomed as they 
are to the notion that a trail is an unpaved route primarily for pedestrians 
edmonton calgary red deer medicine hat and lethbridge have substantial mass 
transit systems edmonton and calgary also operate light rail vehicles alberta 
is well connected by air with international airports at both edmonton and 
calgary calgary s airport is the larger of the two and is also the fourth 
busiest in canada it is a hub airport for a significant proportion of the 
connecting trans border and international flights into and out of central 
canada there are over nine zero zero zero km of operating mainline railway and 
many tourists see alberta aboard via rail or rocky mountain railtours culture 
main article culture of alberta alberta is well known for its warm and outgoing 
friendliness and frontier spirit whyte avenue edmonton summer brings many 
festivals to the province edmonton s fringe festival is the world s second 
largest after edinburgh s alberta also hosts some of canada s largest folk 
festivals multicultural festivals and heritage days to name a few calgary is 
also home to carifest the second largest caribbean festival in the nation after 
caribana in toronto these events highlight the province s cultural diversity 
and love of entertainment most of the major cities have several performing 
theatre companies who entertain in venues as diverse as edmonton s arts barns 
and the francis winspear centre alberta also has a large ethnic population both 
the chinese and east indian communities are significant according to statistics 
canada alberta is home to the second highest proportion two percent of 
francophones in western canada after manitoba many of alberta s french speaking 
residents live in the central and northwestern regions of the province as 
reported in the two zero zero one census the chinese represented nearly four 
percent of alberta s population and east indians represented better than two 
percent both edmonton and calgary have chinatowns and calgary s is canada s 
third largest aboriginal albertans make up approximately three percent of the 
population the major contributors to alberta s ethnic diversity have been the 
european nations forty four percent of albertans are of british and irish 
descent and there are also large numbers of germans ukrainians and 
scandinavians both cities heavily support first class canadian football league 
and national hockey league teams soccer rugby union and lacrosse are also 
played professionally in alberta tourism is also important to albertans a 
million visitors come to alberta each year just for calgary s world famous 
stampede and for edmonton s klondike days edmonton was the gateway to the only 
all canadian route to the yukon gold fields and the only route which did not 
require gold seekers to travel the exhausting and dangerous chilkoot pass 
stephen avenue calgary visitors throng to calgary for ten days every july for a 
taste of stampede fever as a celebration of canada s own wild west and the 
cattle ranching industry the stampede welcomes around one two million people 
each year only an hour s drive from the rocky mountains calgary also makes a 
visit to tourist attractions like banff national park something which can 
easily be done in a day calgary and banff each host nearly five million 
tourists yearly alberta is an important destination for tourists who love to 
ski and hike alberta boasts several world class ski resorts hunters and 
fishermen from around the world are able to take home impressive trophies and 
tall tales from their experiences in alberta s wilderness demographics alberta 
has enjoyed a relatively high rate of growth in recent years due in large part 
to its burgeoning economy between two zero zero three and two zero zero four 
the province saw high birthrates on par with some larger provinces such as 
british columbia relatively high immigration and a high rate of interprovincial 
migration when compared to other provinces as of two zero zero five the 
population of the province was three two one two eight one three albertans 
eight one of this population lives in urban areas and one nine is rural the 
calgary edmonton corridor is the most urbanized area in the province and one of 
the densest in canada many of alberta s cities and towns have also experienced 
very high rates of growth in recent history population of alberta since one 
nine zero one alberta s population has grown steadily for over a century 
racially and ethnically the province is predominantly caucasian eight eight 
eight of the population is either white or aboriginal aboriginals represent a 
fairly small proportion of this percentage however this number is significantly 
smaller in many of the cities particularly calgary and edmonton which are home 
to a much larger number of visible minorities visible minorities three three 
chinese two three asian one one black one one filipino most albertans identify 
as christians nevertheless many people in the province observe other faiths or 
do not profess to a religion at all alberta has a somewhat higher percentage of 
evangelical christians than do other provinces conversely alberta also has the 
second highest percentage of non religious residents in canada after british 
columbia the mormons of alberta reside primarily in the extreme south of the 
province there are temples in both cardston and edmonton many alberta mormons 
descend from mormon pioneers who emigrated from utah around the turn of the two 
zero th century alberta also has a large hutterite population a communal 
anabaptist sect similar to the mennonites and a significant population of 
seventh day adventists in and around the lacombe area due to the presence of 
the canadian university college many people of the hindu sikh and muslim faiths 
also make alberta their home one of the largest sikh temples in canada is 
located just outside of edmonton religion protestant three eight nine roman 
catholic two six seven no affiliation two three six christian orthodox one five 
other christian four one muslim one five buddhist one one history main article 
history of alberta the present province of alberta as far north as about five 
three north latitude was a part of rupert s land from the time of the 
incorporation of the hudson s bay company one six seven zero after the arrival 
in the north west of the french around one seven three one they settled the 
prairies of the west establishing communities such as lac la biche and 
bonnyville fort la jonqui re was established near what is now calgary in one 
seven five two the north west company of montreal occupied the northern part of 
alberta territory before the hudson s bay company arrived from hudson bay to 
take possession of it the first explorer of the athabasca region was peter pond 
who on behalf of the north west company of montreal built fort athabasca on lac 
la biche in one seven seven eight roderick mackenzie built fort chipewyan on 
lake athabasca ten years later in one seven eight eight his cousin sir 
alexander mackenzie followed the north saskatchewan river to its northernmost 
point near edmonton then setting northward on foot trekked to the athabasca 
river which he followed to lake athabasca it was there he discovered the mighty 
outflow river which bears his name the mackenzie river which he followed to its 
outlet in the arctic ocean returning to lake athabasca he followed the peace 
river upstream eventually reaching the pacific ocean and so being the first 
white man to cross the north american continent north of mexico the district of 
alberta was created as part of the north west territories in one eight eight 
two as settlement increased local representatives to the north west legislative 
assembly were added after a long campaign for autonomy in one nine zero five 
the district of alberta was enlarged and given provincial status fauna and 
flora fauna the three climatic regions alpine forest and prairie of alberta are 
home to many different species of animals the south and central prairie was the 
land of the bison its grasses providing a great pasture and breeding ground for 
millions of buffalo the buffalo population was decimated during early 
settlement but since then buffalo have made a strong comeback and thrive on 
farms and in parks all over alberta alberta is home to many large carnivores 
among them are the grizzly and black bears which are found in the mountains and 
wooded regions smaller carnivores of the dog and cat families include coyotes 
wolves fox lynx bobcat and mountain lion cougar rocky mountains bighorn sheep 
herbivorous or plant eating animals are found throughout the province moose and 
deer both mule and white tail varieties are found in the wooded regions and 
pronghorn antelope can be found in the prairies of southern alberta bighorn 
sheep and mountain goats live in the rocky mountains rabbits porcupines skunks 
squirrels and many species of rodents and reptiles live in every corner of the 
province alberta is fortunate in that it is home to only one variety of 
venomous snake the prairie rattlesnake central and northern alberta and the 
region farther north is the nesting ground of the migratory birds vast numbers 
of ducks geese swans and pelicans arrive in alberta every spring and nest on or 
near one of the hundreds of small lakes that dot northern alberta eagles hawks 
owls and crows are plentiful and a huge variety of smaller seed and insect 
eating birds can be found alberta like other temperate regions is home to 
mosquitoes flies wasps and bees rivers and lakes are well stocked with pike 
walleye white fish rainbow speckled and brown trout and even sturgeon turtles 
are found in some water bodies in the southern part of the province frogs and 
salamanders are a few of the amphibians that make their homes in alberta flora 
in central and northern alberta the arrival of spring brings the prairie 
anemone the avens crocuses and other early flowers the advancing summer 
introduces many flowers of the sunflower family until in august the plains are 
one blaze of yellow and purple the southern part of alberta is covered by a 
short grass very nutritive but dries up as summer lengthens to be replaced by 
hardy perennials such as the buffalo bean fleabane and sage both yellow and 
purple clover fill the roadways and the ditches with their beauty and aromatic 
scents the trees in the parkland region of the province grow in clumps and 
belts on the hillsides these are largely deciduous typically birch poplar and 
tamarack many species of willow and other shrubs grow in virtually any terrain 
on the north side of the north saskatchewan river evergreen forests prevail for 
hundreds of thousands of square kilometres aspen poplar balsam poplar or 
cottonwood and paper birch are the primary large deciduous species conifers 
include jack pine rocky mountain pine lodgepole pine both white and black 
spruce and the deciduous conifer tamarack see also family law act external 
links government of alberta website travel alberta alberta encyclopedia alberta 
community profiles a site offering info on tax census info and economic 
development of large and small albertan communities alberta demosphere alberta 
for the fast food restaurant chain see arctic circle restaurants image arctic 
circle zero two one one zero six jpg a sign along the dalton highway marking 
the location of the arctic circle the arctic circle is one of the five major 
circles of latitude that mark maps of the earth this is the parallel of 
latitude that in two zero zero zero runs six six three three three nine north 
of the equator everything north of this circle is known as the arctic and the 
zone just to the south of this circle is the northern temperate zone the arctic 
circle marks the southern extremity of the polar day of the summer solstice in 
june and the polar night of the winter solstice in december within the arctic 
circle the arctic sun is above the horizon for at least two four continuous 
hours once per year in conjunction with the arctic s summer solstice this is 
often referred to in local as midnight sun likewise in conjunction with the 
arctic s winter solstice the arctic sun will be below the horizon for at least 
two four continuous hours in fact because of refraction and because the sun 
appears as a disk and not a point part of the midnight sun may be seen at the 
night of the summer solstice up to about five zero nine zero km south of the 
geometric arctic circle similarly at the day of the winter solstice part of the 
sun may be seen up to about five zero north of the geometric arctic circle this 
is true at sea level these limits increase with elevation above sea level 
however in mountainous regions there is often no direct view of the horizon the 
position of the arctic circle is determined by the axial tilt angle of the 
polar axis of rotation of the earth on the ecliptic this angle is not constant 
but has a complex motion determined by many cycles of short to very long 
periods due to nutation the tilt oscillates over nine about two eight zero m on 
the surface over a period of one eight six years the main long term cycle has a 
period of four one zero zero zero years and an amplitude of about zero six 
eight or seven six km on the surface currently the tilt is decreasing by about 
zero four seven per year so the arctic circle is moving north by about one four 
m per year also see precession countries which have significant territory 
within the arctic circle are russia canada denmark greenland united states of 
america alaska norway sweden finland the country of iceland also has territory 
within the arctic circle but less than one sq km this area is on a few small 
islets of which only gr msey which lies directly on the arctic circle is 
inhabited see also antarctic circle circumpolar arctic external links santa s 
lapland and christmas club lapland and arctic circle topographical map of 
arctic circle centered about north pole map of arctic circle dotted line 
showing major population areas terra incognita exploration of the canadian 
arctic historical essay about early expeditions to the canadian arctic 
illustrated with maps photographs and drawings arctic geography of nunavut 
geography of the northwest territories lines of latitude m one six a two u s 
this version was adopted in one nine eight two an assault rifle is a type of 
automatic rifle generally defined as a selective fire rifle or carbine 
depending on the particular firearm s size using intermediate powered 
ammunition they are categorized between the larger and heavier light machine 
gun and the weaker submachine gun assault rifles are the standard small arm in 
most modern armies having largely replaced or suplemented the larger more 
powerful rifles of the past the name is a literal translation of the german 
term sturmgewehr or storm weapon first applied to the sturmgewehr four four 
developed during world war ii it gradually became a popular term for this type 
of firearm the term has since been retro actively applied to earlier weapons 
with similar traits history one nine zero zero s to the one nine three zero s 
light automatic rifles using rifle cartridges federov avtomat russia the weapon 
fired the japanese rifle cartridge these automatic firearms tended to use used 
pre existing rifle cartridges kinetic energy ranged between three zero zero 
zero five zero zero zero j two two zero zero three seven zero zero foot pounds 
velocites of seven five zero nine zero zero m s two four six zero two nine five 
zero ft s and bullets of nine to one three g one three nine two zero zero 
grains the first true assault rifle was probably the italian made cei rigotti 
which was developed in the one eight nine zero s and finished around one nine 
zero zero at the beginning of the two zero th century it never entered military 
service however the first service assault rifle was the russian federov avtomat 
of one nine one six chambered for the japanese arisaka six five five zero mm 
rifle cartridge which was only used in small numbers due to supply problems the 
browning automatic rifle bar was a world war i era weapon that used a full 
power round it was an automatic rifle by today s definition and designed for 
single accurate shots and suppressive automatic fire the weight of roughly one 
five pounds seven kg meant that it was rather cumbersome for closer quarters 
later developments added heavier barrels and bipods that lent it to being used 
as more like today s light machine gun or squad automatic weapon though it did 
help establish the doctrine of use for light selective fire rifles the bar was 
produced in large numbers widely adopted and served into the one nine six zero 
s with the u s military and other nations while it did not use an intermediate 
cartridge it was an intermediate weapon between the newly adopted submachine 
guns and heavier machine guns such as the lewis gun during wwi a few weaker 
submachine guns also entered service such as the villar perosa the berretta one 
nine one eight and the mp one eight these weapons fired rounds based of pistols 
nine mm glisenti and nine mm bergmann the nine mm bergman was based on the nine 
mm parabellum with reduced charge to reduce recoil in the mp one eight the 
developers of the thompson submachine gun also developed during the one nine 
one zero s originally intended to use rifle powered rounds however a mechanical 
system that could handle their power was not found and it ended up using the 
four five acp cartridge these firearms are considered part of the submachine 
gun class but were an important part in the development of the assault rifles 
one nine three zero s automatic intermediate weapons some of these automatic 
and semi automatic firearms used new intermediate cartridges others used pre 
existing rounds an attempt to provide soldiers with a rifle with intermediate 
power ammunition that was heavier than a submachine gun too weak with short 
range due to the pistol ammunition but lighter than a long rifle uncomfortable 
to fire and difficult to control on fully automatic mode due to the powerful 
ammunition more expensive to design and manufacture by the italian arms company 
beretta resulted in the mab three eight moschetto automatico beretta one nine 
three eight the mab three eight used a fiocchi nine m three eight cartridge and 
a higher powered nine mm parabellum cartridge which could provide longer range 
fire the effective range was about two zero zero m although it was declared to 
be effective up to five zero zero m the mab three eight was a multipurpose 
weapon m one carbine u s unlike the m one the later m two and m three were 
fully automatic in one nine three eight prior to world war ii the united states 
introduced the m one carbine which was an intermediate power weapon chambered 
for the three zero carbine cartridge the m one carbine was originally planned 
to have automatic fire but this was dropped from the first version although 
later in the war selective fire variants were made m two and m three carbines 
the weapon had higher stopping power than submachine guns but was not as 
powerful as full size automatic rifles such as the bar the longer barrel one 
eight inch provided the carbine with higher muzzle velocity than pistols and 
submachine guns chambered for the same three zero round the m one carbine 
series was designed for close quarters engagements a concept that would be re 
applied later it marked the first time in which such an intermediate weapon 
would be mass produced in such large numbers it became the most produced 
american weapon of the war with millions made the m one carbine series would 
remain in service with the u s military until replaced by the m one six rifle 
in the one nine six zero s it continued to be used in other nations one nine 
four zero s and one nine five zero s maschinenkarabiner sturmgewehr others used 
new intermediate cartridges kinetic energy ranged between one four zero zero 
two one zero zero j one zero three three one five five zero foot pounds muzzle 
velocities of six zero zero eight zero zero m s one nine seven zero two six two 
five ft s and bullets of seven nine g one zero eight one three nine grains 
germany like other countries had studied the problem since world war i and 
their factories made a variety of non standard cartridges therefore having less 
incentive to retain their existing calibers the seven nine two three zero mm 
cartridge was an example of these experiments in one nine four one it was 
improved to seven nine two three three mm infanterie kurz patrone infantry 
short standard in one nine four two it was again improved as maschinenkarabiner 
patrone s and in one nine four three pistolen patrone four three me then 
finally infanterie kurz patrone four three it is just a coincidence but the 
intermediate cartridge developed by winchester for the m one carbine developed 
slightly before also measured three three mm in one nine four two walther 
presented the maschinenkarabiner automatic carbine abbr mkb named mkb four two 
w in the same year haenel presented the mkb four two h designed by hugo 
schmeisser as a result of this program rheinmetall borsig some said krieghoff 
presented its fg four two fallschirmjaeger gewehr four two sponsored by hermann 
g ring though this was in a different role and using a heavy eight five seven 
mm eight mm mauser cartridge which was not an intermediate round war time tests 
in russia indicated the mkb four two h performed better than the other two 
schmeisser developed it first as the mp four three then mp four three one and 
finally as the mp four four sturmgewehr four four abbreviated stg four four it 
immediately entered large scale production more than five zero zero zero units 
had been produced by february one nine four four and five five zero zero zero 
by the following november following the end of the war the soviet union 
developed the ak four seven which was vaguely similar in concept and layout to 
the german stg four four but extremely different mechanically it fired the 
seven six two three nine mm cartridge which had been developed during wwii the 
round was similar to the stg four four s in that the bullet was of a similar 
caliber to the russian rifle ammunition one nine six zero s and one nine seven 
zero s lighter automatic weapons and lighter smaller bullets many of these 
automatic firearms used intermediate cartridges with much lighter bullets and 
smaller calibers but fired at very high velocity kinetic energy ranged between 
one three zero zero one eight zero zero j nine six zero one three three zero 
foot pounds velocities of nine zero zero one zero five zero m s two nine five 
zero three four five zero ft s and bullets of three four g four six six two 
grains sig five five zero swiss the sig fires gw pat nine zero which has the 
same caliber as the five five six mm nato many nations continued the 
development of traditional high powered rifles with ranges of five zero zero 
meters five five zero yards and beyond most designs of this period used low 
caliber but high velocity ammunition with some experiments in flechettes and 
other exotic ammunition statistical studies of world war ii battles performed 
by the u s army revealed that infantry combat beyond three zero zero meters 
three two five yards was rare the russians saw no reason to make a rifle that 
shot beyond a rifleman s ability to aim therefore a lighter less powerful 
cartridge could be effective this permitted a lighter rifle and enabled troops 
to carry more ammunition making them more autonomous a greater amount of the 
lighter ammunition could be transported in the same amount of space in addition 
the smaller size and handiness of an assault rifle would benefit tank crews 
support troops and units with missions other than front line combat the five 
five six four five mm nato cartridge was developed in the one nine six zero s 
and was adopted for use in the m one six assault rifle the m one six a one 
version soon followed and was then replaced in one nine eight two by the m one 
six a two the soviet union also developed its own similar round the five four 
five three nine mm which was used in the ak seven four the successor of the ak 
four seven these rounds are usually considered less lethal than the previous 
generation of assault rifle rounds that fired larger rifle caliber ammunition 
with reduced propellant but the smaller caliber and lighter bullets achieve 
higher velocities than even a hunting rifle bullet these high speeds induce 
additional lethality through bullet shattering although these high speed rounds 
generally do not exceed the momentum of the heavier but slower bullets of the 
less sophisticated ak four seven any pointed spitzer round will tumble in soft 
tissue if the jacket has a cannelure like the u s five five six four five mm m 
one nine three round the bullet will fragment leading to significant blood loss 
and internal damage blood loss leads to indirect incapacitation but often takes 
longer than direct destruction of tissue since combat use of rifles expends 
around five zero zero zero zero rounds in suppressive fire for each combatant 
killed trading lighter cartridge weight and lower recoil for slower but more 
sure incapacitation often makes good sense the key to the assault rifle concept 
is firing at both known and suspected enemy positions this allows an attacking 
infantry unit to shoot at a hidden enemy first rather than waiting for the 
enemy to fire first good volume and distribution of aimed suppressive fire 
delivered by infantry squad members as they maneuver prevents enemy return fire 
and in turn allows the assaulting unit to maneuver through enemy fields of fire 
faster faster maneuver limits the assaulting unit s vulnerability to small arms 
fire artillery mortars or counter attack of course this requires a larger basic 
ammunition load and steady supply of rifle ammunition one nine seven zero s one 
nine eight zero s one nine nine zero s new form factors and features many of 
these automatic firearms usually used the same rounds as in older eras but 
focused on using new form factors materials and added features like standard 
telescopic and reflex sights famas france it was adopted in one nine seven 
eight the biggest change since adoption of high velocity rounds of five mm 
caliber and higher has been designs that have new form factors sights 
electronics and materials a number of bullpup rifles entered service in the 
late one nine seven zero s one nine eight zero s and one nine nine zero s 
although bullpup rifles had existed since the one nine three zero s the united 
kingdom s em two was one of the few bullpup assault rifles prior to this time 
examples of the new trend include the famas steyr aug and sa eight zero they 
were all bullpup rifles that made heavy use of composites and plastics with 
ambidextrous controls and the latter both added a low power telescopic sight to 
the standard service version the sar two one the tavor tar two one and qbz nine 
five follow a similar trend as well with a bullpup configuration and heavy use 
of composites the heckler seven mm range with rifle round velocities and lower 
mass bullets a kind of intermediate philosophy between the smaller caliber 
faster modern rounds and the standard caliber slower rounds of the previous 
generation china in the late one nine eight zero s introduced a five eight four 
two mm round with an initial velocity of nine three zero m s four two six g 
bullet and one eight four two j of energy china claims the new round provides 
superior performace and lethality to the nato and modern soviet intermediate 
rounds in the united states remington has developed the six eight mm remington 
spc cartridge which is the same overall length at the five five six x four five 
mm nato round but fires a bullet the same caliber at the two seven zero 
winchester hunting cartridge its similar size to the five five six four five mm 
means that existing rifles can be converted without an excessive amount of 
trouble development of a four seven three mm caseless ammunition and advanced 
assault rifle in the one nine seven zero one nine eight zero s by germany was 
effectively halted by the german reunification in one nine nine zero and that 
rifle never entered full production assault weapons vs fully automatic weapons 
primarily in the united states the term assault weapon is an arbitrary and 
politicized phrase generally used to describe a collection of semi automatic 
firearms that have certain features associated with military police use such as 
a folding stock flash suppressor bayonet protruding pistol grip or the ability 
to accept a detachable magazine of a capacity larger than ten rounds the phrase 
assault weapon has been used primarily in relation to a specific expired gun 
law that was commonly known as the assault weapons ban clinton gun ban or one 
nine nine four crime bill it is a common misconception that the assault weapons 
ban restricted weapons capable of fully automatic fire such as assault rifles 
and machine guns fully automatic weapons were unaffected by the ban because 
they have been heavily restricted since the national firearms act of one nine 
three four and other more recent laws the term assault weapon has often been 
erroneously used to describe machine guns many states and localities still use 
the term assault weapon with a variety of variations following the california 
model loosely see separate article on assault weapons for further information 
see also automatic firearm for clarification on similar categories battle rifle 
federal assault weapons ban usa firearm action gas operated list of firearms 
external links assault rifles and their ammunition history and prospects rifles 
assault rifles animals are a major group of organisms classified as the kingdom 
animalia or metazoa in general they are multicellular capable of locomotion and 
responsive to their environment and feed by consuming other organisms their 
body plan becomes fixed as they develop usually early on in their development 
as embryos although some undergo a process of metamorphosis later on the name 
animal comes from the latin word animal of which animalia is the plural and 
ultimately from anima meaning vital breath or soul characteristics kingdom 
animalia has several characteristics that set it apart from other living things 
animals are eukaryotic and multicellular which separates them from bacteria and 
most protists they are heterotrophic generally digesting food in an internal 
chamber which separates them from plants and algae they are also distinguished 
from plants algae and fungi by lacking cell walls structure with a few 
exceptions most notably the sponges phylum porifera animals have bodies 
differentiated into separate tissues these include muscles which are able to 
contract and control locomotion and a nervous system which sends and processes 
signals there is also typically an internal digestive chamber with one or two 
openings animals with this sort of organization are called metazoans or 
eumetazoans when the former is used for animals in general all animals have 
eukaryotic cells surrounded by a characteristic extracellular matrix composed 
of collagen and elastic glycoproteins this may be calcified to form structures 
like shells bones and spicules during development it forms a relatively 
flexible framework upon which cells can move about and be reorganized making 
complex structures possible in contrast other multicellular organisms like 
plants and fungi have cells held in place by cell walls and so develop by 
progressive growth also unique to animal cells are the following intercellular 
junctions tight junctions gap junctions and desmosomes reproduction and 
development nearly all animals undergo some form of sexual reproduction adults 
are diploid or occasionally polyploid they have a few specialized reproductive 
cells which undergo meiosis to produce smaller motile spermatozoa or larger non 
motile ova these fuse to form zygotes which develop into new individuals many 
animals are also capable of asexual reproduction this may take place through 
parthenogenesis where fertile eggs are produced without mating or in some cases 
through fragmentation a zygote initially develops into a hollow sphere called a 
blastula which undergoes rearrangement and differentiation in sponges blastula 
larvae swim to a new location and develop into a new sponge in most other 
groups the blastula undergoes more complicated rearrangement it first 
invaginates to form a gastrula with a digestive chamber and two separate germ 
layers an external ectoderm and an internal endoderm in most cases a mesoderm 
also develops between them these germ layers then differentiate to form tissues 
and organs animals grow by indirectly using the energy of sunlight plants use 
this energy to turn air into simple sugars using a process known as 
photosynthesis these sugars are then used as the building blocks which allow 
the plant to grow when animals eat these plants or eat other animals which have 
eaten plants the sugars produced by the plant are used by the animal they are 
either used directly to help the animal grow or broken down releasing stored 
solar energy and giving the animal the energy required for motion this process 
is known as glycolysis origin and fossil record animals are generally 
considered to have evolved from flagellate protozoa their closest living 
relatives are the choanoflagellates collared flagellates that have the same 
structure as certain sponge cells do molecular studies place them in a 
supergroup called the opisthokonts which also include the fungi and a few small 
parasitic protists the name comes from the posterior location of the flagellum 
in motile cells such as most animal sperm whereas other eukaryotes tend to have 
anterior flagella the first fossils that might represent animals appear towards 
the end of the precambrian around six zero zero million years ago and are known 
as the vendian biota these are difficult to relate to later fossils however 
some may represent precursors of modern phyla but they may be separate groups 
and it is possible they are not really animals at all aside from them most 
known animal phyla make a more or less simultaneous appearance during the 
cambrian period about five seven zero million years ago it is still disputed 
whether this event called the cambrian explosion represents a rapid divergence 
between different groups or a change in conditions that made fossilization 
possible groups of animals elephant ear sponge the sponges porifera diverged 
from other animals early as mentioned they lack the complex organization found 
in most other phyla their cells are differentiated but not organized into 
distinct tissues sponges are sessile and typically feed by drawing in water 
through pores archaeocyatha which have fused skeletons may represent sponges or 
a separate phylum brain coral among the eumetazoan phyla two are radially 
symmetric and have digestive chambers with a single opening which serves as 
both the mouth and the anus these are the cnidaria which include sea anemones 
corals and jellyfish and the ctenophora or comb jellies both have distinct 
tissues but they are not organized into organs there are only two main germ 
layers the ectoderm and endoderm with only scattered cells between them as such 
these animals are sometimes called diploblastic the tiny phylum placozoa is 
similar but individuals do not have a permanent digestive chamber the remaining 
animals form a monophyletic group called the bilateria for the most part they 
are bilaterally symmetric and often have a specialized head with feeding and 
sensory organs the body is triploblastic i e all three germ layers are well 
developed and tissues form distinct organs the digestive chamber has two 
openings a mouth and an anus and there is also an internal body cavity called a 
coelom or pseudocoelom there are exceptions to each of these characteristics 
however for instance adult echinoderms are radially symmetric and certain 
parasitic worms have extremely simplified body structures clownfish in their 
sea anemone home genetic studies have considerably changed our understanding of 
the relationships within the bilateria most appear to belong to four major 
lineages deuterostomes ecdysozoa platyzoa lophotrochozoa in addition to these 
there are a few small groups of bilaterians with relatively similar structure 
that appear to have diverged before these major groups these include the 
acoelomorpha rhombozoa and orthonectida the myxozoa single celled parasites 
that were originally considered protozoa are now believed to have developed 
from the bilateria as well the magellanic penguin deuterostomes deuterostomes 
differ from the other bilateria called protostomes in several ways in both 
cases there is a complete digestive tract however in protostomes the initial 
opening the archenteron develops into the mouth and an anus forms separately in 
deuterostomes this is reversed in most protostomes cells simply fill in the 
interior of the gastrula to form the mesoderm called schizocoelous development 
but in deuterostomes it forms through invagination of the endoderm called 
enterocoelic pouching deuterostomes also have a dorsal rather than a ventral 
nerve chord and their embryos undergo different cleavage all this suggests the 
deuterostomes and protostomes are separate monophyletic lineages the main phyla 
of deuterostomes are the echinodermata and chordata the former are radially 
symmetric and exclusively marine such as sea stars sea urchins and sea 
cucumbers the latter are dominated by the vertebrates animals with backbones 
these include fish amphibians reptiles birds and mammals in addition to these 
the deuterostomes also include the hemichordata or acorn worms although they 
are not especially prominent today the important fossil graptolites may belong 
to this group the chaetognatha or arrow worms may also be deuterostomes but 
this is less certain ecdysozoa the yellow winged darter the ecdysozoa are 
protostomes named after the common trait of growth by moulting or ecdysis the 
largest animal phylum belongs here the arthropoda including insects spiders 
crabs and their kin all these organisms have a body divided into repeating 
segments typically with paired appendages two smaller phyla the onychophora and 
tardigrada are close relatives of the arthropods and share these traits 
roundworm the ecdysozoans also include the nematoda or roundworms the second 
largest animal phylum roundworms are typically microscopic and occur in nearly 
every environment where there is water a number are important parasites smaller 
phyla related to them are the nematomorpha or horsehair worms which are visible 
to the unaided eye and the kinorhyncha priapulida and loricifera which are all 
microscopic these groups have a reduced coelom called a pseudocoelom the 
remaining two groups of protostomes are sometimes grouped together as the 
spiralia since in both embryos develop with spiral cleavage bedford s flatworm 
platyzoa the platyzoa include the phylum platyhelminthes the flatworms these 
were originally considered some of the most primitive bilateria but it now 
appears they developed from more complex ancestors rotifer a number of 
parasites are included in this group such as the flukes and tapeworms flatworms 
lack a coelom as do their closest relatives the microscopic gastrotricha the 
other platyzoan phyla are microscopic and pseudocoelomate the most prominent 
are the rotifera or rotifers which are common in aqueous environments they also 
include the acanthocephala or spiny headed worms the gnathostomulida 
micrognathozoa and possibly the cycliophora these groups share the presence of 
complex jaws from which they are called the gnathifera lophotrochozoa big blue 
octopus the lophotrochozoa include two of the most successful animal phyla the 
mollusca and annelida the former includes animals such as snails clams and 
squids and the latter comprises the segmented worms such as earthworms and 
leeches these two groups have long been considered close relatives because of 
the common presence of trochophore larvae but the annelids were considered 
closer to the arthropods because they are both segmented now this is generally 
considered convergent evolution owing to many morphological and genetic 
differences between the two phyla the lophotrochozoa also include the nemertea 
or ribbon worms the sipuncula and several phyla that have a fan of cilia around 
the mouth called a lophophore these were traditionally grouped together as the 
lophophorates but it now appears they are paraphyletic some closer to the 
nemertea and some to the mollusca and annelida they include the brachiopoda or 
lamp shells which are prominent in the fossil record the entoprocta the 
phoronida and possibly the bryozoa or moss animals history of classification 
white s tree frog vulpes vulpes the red fox aristotle divided the living world 
between animals and plants and this was followed by carolus linnaeus in the 
first hierarchical classification since then biologists have begun emphasizing 
evolutionary relationships and so these groups have been restricted somewhat 
for instance microscopic protozoa were originally considered animals because 
they move but are now treated separately in linnaeus original scheme the 
animals were one of three kingdoms divided into the classes of vermes insecta 
pisces amphibia aves and mammalia since then the last four have all been 
subsumed into a single phylum the chordata whereas the various other forms have 
been separated out the above lists represent our current understanding of the 
group though there is some variation from source to source usage of the word 
animal in everyday usage animal refers to any member of the animal kingdom that 
is not a human being and sometimes excludes insects although including such 
arthropods as crabs this confusion stems primarily from the familiarity with 
zoo animals farm animals and pets not from an analytical distinction between 
insects humans and the rest of the animal kingdom examples some well known 
types of animals listed by their common names aardvark afghan hound albatross 
alligator alpaca anaconda angelfish anglerfish ant antlion anteater antelope 
ape aphid armadillo arrow crab asp ass baboon badger bald eagle bandicoot 
barnacle basilisk barracuda bass basset hound bat bear beaver bed bug bee 
beetle bird bison blackbird black panther black widow blue jay blue whale boa 
bobcat bobolink booby box jellyfish boston terrier bovid buffalo bug bulldog 
bull terrier butterfly buzzard camel canid cape buffalo cardinal bird caribou 
carp cat caterpillar catfish centipede cephalopod chameleon cheetah chickadee 
chicken chihuahua chimpanzee chinchilla chipmunk clam clownfish cobra cockroach 
cod collie condor constrictor coral cougar coyote cow crab crane crane fly 
crawdad crayfish cricket crocodile crow cuckoo daddy longlegs damselfly deer 
dingo dinosaur dog dolphin donkey dormouse dove dragonfly duck dung beetle 
eagle earthworm earwig eel egret elephant elephant seal elk emu english pointer 
english setter ermine falcon ferret finch firefly fish flamingo flea fly 
flyingfish fowl fox frog fruit bat gazelle gecko gerbil german shepherd giant 
panda giant squid gibbon gila monster guanaco guineafowl giraffe goat golden 
retriever goldfinch goldfish goose gopher gorilla grasshopper great blue heron 
great dane great white shark greyhound grizzly bear grouse guinea pig gull 
guppy haddock halibut hammerhead shark hamster hare harrier hawk hedgehog 
hermit crab heron herring hippopotamus hookworm hornet horse hound human 
hummingbird humpback whale husky hyena iguana impala insect irish setter irish 
wolfhound irukandji jellyfish jackal jaguar jay jellyfish kangaroo kangaroo 
mouse kangaroo rat kingfisher kite kiwi koala koi komodo dragon krill labrador 
retriever ladybug lamprey lark leech lemming lemur leopard leopon liger lion 
lizard llama lobster locust loon louse lungfish lynx macaw mackerel magpie 
mammal manta ray marlin marmoset marmot marsupial marten mastiff meadowlark 
meerkat mink minnow mite mockingbird mole mollusk mongoose monitor lizard 
monkey moose mosquito moth mountain goat mouse mule muskox mussel narwhal newt 
nightingale ocelot octopus old english sheepdog opossum orangutan orca ostrich 
otter owl ox oyster panda panther panthera hybrid parakeet parrot parrotfish 
partridge peacock peafowl pekingese pelican penguin perch peregrine falcon 
persian cat pheasant pig pigeon pike pilot whale piranha platypus polar bear 
poodle porcupine porpoise portuguese man o war possum prairie dog prawn praying 
mantis primate puffin puma python quail rabbit raccoon rainbow trout rat 
rattlesnake raven reindeer rhinoceros right whale roadrunner robin rodent rook 
roundworm sailfish saint bernard salamander salmon sawfish scallop scorpion 
seahorse sea lion sea slug sea urchin setter shark sheep sheepdog shrew shrimp 
siamese cat silkworm silverfish skink skunk sloth slug smelt snail snake snipe 
snow leopard sockeye salmon sole spaniel sperm whale spider spider monkey 
spoonbill squid squirrel starfish star nosed mole steelhead trout stoat stork 
sturgeon swallow swan swift swordfish swordtail tabby cat tahr takin tapeworm 
tapir tarantula tasmanian devil termite tern terrier thrush tiger tiger shark 
tigon toad tortoise toucan toy poodle trapdoor spider tree frog trout tuna 
turkey turtle tyrannosaurus urial vampire bat viper vole vulture wallaby walrus 
wasp warbler water buffalo weasel whale whitefish whooping crane wild cat 
wildebeest wildfowl wolf wolverine wombat woodpecker worm wren yak zebra 
references klaus nielsen animal evolution interrelationships of the living 
phyla two nd edition oxford univ press two zero zero one knut schmidt nielsen 
animal physiology adaptation and environment five th edition cambridge univ 
press one nine nine seven external links tree of life project arkive multimedia 
database of worldwide endangered protected species and of uk common species 
sounds of the world s animals animal sounds in many languages animals see 
anthropology a list of notable anthropologists notoc a john adair timothy asch 
b nigel barley fredrik barth vasily bartold keith h basso ruth behar ruth 
benedict theodore c bestor wilhelm bleek franz boas pere bosch gimpera paul 
pierre broca c mauro campagnoli joseph campbell napol on chagnon pierre 
clastres carleton coon frank hamilton cushing d raymond dart ella cara deloria 
mary douglas eugene dubois e mircea eliade e e evans pritchard f raymond firth 
dian fossey james frazer g clifford geertz alfred gell ernest gellner max 
gluckman jane goodall robert j gorden hilma granqvist marcel griaule jacob 
grimm wilhelm grimm h marvin harris cassidy hendrickson arthur maurice hocart 
earnest hooton ale hrdli ka i j william jones k richard g klein dorinne k kondo 
conrad kottak grover krantz charles h kraft alfred l kroeber hilda kuper l 
william labov george lakoff bruno latour edmund leach louis leakey mary leakey 
richard leakey claude l vi strauss robert lowie m bronislaw malinowski marcel 
mauss grant mccracken margaret mead mervyn meggitt nikolay miklukho maklay 
sidney mintz ashley montagu james mooney john h moore lewis h morgan george 
murdock n laura nader raoul naroll o gananath obeyesekere marvin opler morris 
opler p glenn petersen bronislav pilsudski hortense powdermaker q r wilhelm 
radloff hans ras alfred reginald radcliffe brown gerardo reichel dolmatoff w h 
r rivers eric ross s marshall sahlins roger sandall edward sapir wilhelm 
schmidt tobias schneebaum afanasy shchapov marilyn strathern t edward burnett 
tylor colin turnbull victor turner u v christine vanpool karl verner w camilla 
wedgwood hank wesselman leslie white ben white tim white benjamin whorf clark 
wissler eric wolf sol worth x y z lists of people by occupation anthropologists 
astronomy and astrophysics abbreviated as a a in the astronomical literature or 
else astron astrophys is a european journal publishing papers on theoretical 
observational and instrumental astronomy and astrophysics it was published by 
springer verlag from one nine six nine two zero zero zero while edp sciences 
published the companion a a supplement series in two zero zero zero the two 
journals merged with the combined journal known simply as astronomy and 
astrophysics and published by edp sciences a a is one of the major journals of 
astronomy alongside the astrophysical journal astronomical journal and the 
monthly notices of the royal astronomical society while the first two are often 
the preferred journal of us based researchers and the mnras is often the 
favoured journal for uk and commonwealth based astronomers a a tends to be the 
preferred journal of astronomers based in europe excluding the uk particularly 
since page charges are waived for astronomers working in member countries a a 
was created from the merger in one nine six nine of six major european 
astronomical journals annales d astrophysique france founded in one nine three 
eight arkiv for astronomi sweden founded in one nine four eight bulletin of the 
astronomical institutes of the netherlands founded in one nine two one bulletin 
astronomique france founded in one eight eight four journal des observateurs 
france founded in one nine one five zeitschrift fur astrophysik germany founded 
in one nine three zero and extended in one nine nine two by the incorporation 
of bulletin of the astronomical institutes of czechoslovakia founded in one 
nine four seven external links a a home page a a publisher s home page 
astronomy journals the actinopterygii are the ray finned fish they are the 
dominant group of vertebrates with over two seven zero zero zero species 
ubiquitous throughout fresh water and marine environments classification 
traditionally three grades of actinopterygii have been recognized the 
chondrostei holostei and teleostei the second is paraphyletic and tends to be 
abandoned however while the first is now restricted to those forms closer to 
extant chondrostei than to the other groups nearly all fish alive today are 
teleosts a listing of the different groups is given below down to the level of 
orders arranged in what is believed to represent the evolutionary sequence down 
to the level of superorder subclass chondrostei order polypteriformes bichirs 
order acipenseriformes sturgeons paddlefish subclass neopterygii order 
semionotiformes gars order amiiformes bowfins infraclass teleostei superorder 
osteoglossomorpha order osteoglossiformes bony tongues etc order hiodontiformes 
mooneye etc superorder elopomorpha order elopiformes tarpons etc order 
albuliformes bonefishes order notacanthiformes spiny eels order anguilliformes 
true eels gulpers order saccopharyngiformes superorder clupeomorpha order 
clupeiformes herrings allies superorder ostariophysi order gonorynchiformes 
order cypriniformes minnows allies order characiformes characins allies order 
gymnotiformes electric eels knifefishes order siluriformes catfishes superorder 
protacanthopterygii order salmoniformes salmon allies order esociformes pikes 
allies order osmeriformes smelts allies superorder sternopterygii order 
ateleopodiformes jellynose fishes order stomiiformes dragonfishes allies 
superorder cyclosquamata order aulopiformes lizardfishes superorder 
scopelomorpha order myctophiformes lanternfishes superorder lampridiomorpha 
order lampridiformes opahs etc superorder polymyxiomorpha order polymixiiformes 
beardfishes superorder paracanthopterygii order percopsiformes trout perches 
allies order batrachoidiformes toadfishes order lophiiformes goosefishes etc 
order gadiformes cods allies order ophidiiformes cusk eels etc superorder 
acanthopterygii order mugiliformes mullets allies order atheriniformes 
silversides allies order beloniformes needlefishes etc order cetomimiformes 
whalefishes order cyprinodontiformes killifishes etc order stephanoberyciformes 
pricklefishes whalefishes etc order beryciformes alfonsinos etc order zeiformes 
dories etc order gasterosteiformes sticklebacks pipefishes seahorses etc order 
synbranchiformes swamp eels etc order tetraodontiformes triggerfishes allies 
order pleuronectiformes flatfishes allies order scorpaeniformes scorpionfishes 
allies order perciformes perches many allies subphulum vertebrata external 
links ncbi taxonomy entry references ray finned fish bony fish albert einstein 
photographed by oren j turner in one nine four seven albert einstein march one 
four one eight seven nine april one eight one nine five five was a german born 
theoretical physicist widely regarded as the greatest scientist of the two zero 
th century he was the author of the general theory of relativity and made 
important contributions to the special theory of relativity quantum mechanics 
statistical mechanics and cosmology he was awarded the one nine two one nobel 
prize for physics for his explanation of the photoelectric effect in one nine 
zero five his miracle year and for his services to theoretical physics after 
british solar eclipse expeditions in one nine one nine confirmed that light 
rays from distant stars were deflected by the gravity of the sun in the exact 
amount he predicted in his general theory of relativity einstein became world 
famous an unusual achievement for a scientist in his later years his fame 
exceeded that of any other scientist in history in popular culture his name has 
become synonymous with great intelligence and genius biography young einstein 
before the einsteins moved from germany to italy youth and college einstein was 
born on march one four one eight seven nine at ulm in baden w rttemberg german 
empire about one zero zero km east of stuttgart his parents were hermann 
einstein a featherbed salesman who later ran an electrochemical works and 
pauline whose maiden name was koch they were married in stuttgart bad cannstatt 
the family was jewish non observant albert attended a catholic elementary 
school and at the insistence of his mother was given violin lessons though he 
initially disliked and eventually discontinued the lessons he would later take 
great solace in mozart s violin sonatas when albert was five his father showed 
him a pocket compass and einstein realized that something in empty space acted 
upon the needle he would later describe the experience as one of the most 
revelatory of his life though he built models and mechanical devices for fun 
and showed great mathematical faculty early on he was considered a slow learner 
possibly due to dyslexia simple shyness or the significantly rare and unusual 
structure of his brain examined after his death he later credited his 
development of the theory of relativity to this slowness saying that by 
pondering space and time later than most children he was able to apply a more 
developed intellect some researchers have speculated that einstein may have 
exhibited some traits of mild forms of autism although they concede that a 
reliable posthumous diagnosis is impossible in one eight eight nine a student 
named max talmud introduced einstein to key science and philosophy texts 
including kant s critique of pure reason two of his uncles would further foster 
his intellectual interests during his late childhood and early adolescence by 
suggesting and providing books on science mathematics and philosophy einstein 
attended the luitpold gymnasium where he received a relatively progressive 
education he began to learn mathematics around age twelve in one eight nine one 
he taught himself euclidean plane geometry from a school booklet and began to 
study calculus there is a recurring rumor that he failed mathematics later in 
his education but this is untrue a change in the way grades were assigned 
caused confusion years later while there he clashed with authority and resented 
the school regimen believing the spirit of learning and creative thought were 
lost in such an endeavor as strict memorization in one eight nine four 
following the failure of hermann s electrochemical business the einsteins moved 
from munich to pavia italy near milan einstein s first scientific work was 
written therein called the investigation of the state of aether in magnetic 
fields albert remained behind in munich lodgings to finish school completing 
only one term before leaving the gymnasium in spring one eight nine five to 
rejoin his family in pavia he quit without telling his parents and a year and a 
half prior to final examinations einstein convinced the school to let him go 
with a medical note from a friendly doctor but this meant he had no secondary 
school certificate that year at the age of one six he performed the thought 
experiment known as albert einstein s mirror after gazing into a mirror he 
examined what would happen to his image if he were moving at the speed of light 
his conclusion that the speed of light is independent of the observer would 
later become one of the two postulates of special relativity despite excelling 
in the mathematics and science portion his failure of the liberal arts portion 
of the eidgen ssische technische hochschule eth swiss federal institute of 
technology in zurich entrance exam the following year was a setback his family 
sent him to aarau switzerland to finish secondary school where he studied the 
seldom taught maxwell s electromagnetic theory and received his diploma in 
september one eight nine six during this time he lodged with professor jost 
winteler s family and became enamoured with marie their daughter his first 
sweetheart albert s sister maja was to later marry their son paul and his 
friend michele besso married their other daughter anna einstein subsequently 
enrolled at the eidgen ssische technische hochschule in october and moved to 
zurich while marie moved to olsberg for a teaching post the same year he 
renounced his w rttemberg citizenship and became stateless in the spring of one 
eight nine six the serbian mileva mari started initially as a medical student 
at the university of zurich but after a term switched to the same section as 
einstein as the only woman that year to study for the same diploma einstein s 
relationship with mileva developed into romance over the next few years in one 
nine zero zero he was granted a teaching diploma by the eidgen ssische 
technische hochschule eth zurich einstein then wrote his first published paper 
on the capillary forces of a drinking straw wherein he tried to unify the laws 
of physics an attempt he would continually make throughout his life it was 
titled folgerungen aus den capillarit tserscheinungen which translated is 
consequences of the observations of capillarity phenomena found in annalen der 
physik volume four page five one three shortly following einstein was accepted 
as a swiss citizen in one nine zero one he kept his swiss passport for his 
whole life through his friend michelle besso an engineer he was presented with 
the works of ernst mach and later would consider him the best sounding board in 
europe for physical ideas during this time einstein discussed his scientific 
interests with a group of close friends including besso and mileva the men 
referred to themselves as the olympia academy he and mileva had an illegitimate 
daughter lieserl born in january one nine zero two work and doctorate einstein 
in one nine zero five when he wrote the annus mirabilis papers upon graduation 
einstein could not find a teaching post mostly because his brashness as a young 
man had apparently irritated most of his professors the father of a classmate 
helped him obtain employment as a technical assistant examiner at the swiss 
patent office in one nine zero two there einstein judged the worth of inventors 
patent applications for devices that required a knowledge of physics to 
understand in particular he was chiefly charged to evaluate patents relating to 
electromagnetic devices he also learned how to discern the essence of 
applications despite sometimes poor descriptions and was taught by the director 
how to express himself correctly he occasionally rectified their design errors 
while evaluating the practicality of their work einstein married mileva mari on 
january six one nine zero three einstein s marriage to mari who was a 
mathematician was both a personal and intellectual partnership einstein 
referred to mileva as a creature who is my equal and who is as strong and 
independent as i am ronald w clark a biographer of einstein claimed that 
einstein depended on the distance that existed in his and mileva s marriage in 
order to have the solitude necessary to accomplish his work he required 
intellectual isolation abram joffe a soviet physicist who knew einstein in an 
obituary of einstein wrote the author of the papers of one nine zero five was a 
bureaucrat at the patent office in bern einstein mari and this has recently 
been taken as evidence of a collaborative relationship however according to 
alberto a mart nez of the center for einstein studies at boston university 
joffe only ascribed authorship to einstein as he believed that it was a swiss 
custom at the time to append the spouse s last name to the husband s name 
whatever the truth the extent of her influence on einstein s work is a highly 
controversial and debated question on may one four one nine zero four the 
couple s first son hans albert einstein was born in one nine zero three 
einstein s position at the swiss patent office had been made permanent though 
he was passed over for promotion until he had fully mastered machine technology 
he obtained his doctorate after submitting his thesis a new determination of 
molecular dimensions eine neue bestimmung der molek ldimensionen in one nine 
zero five that same year he wrote four articles that provided the foundation of 
modern physics without much scientific literature to which he could refer or 
many scientific colleagues with whom he could discuss the theories most 
physicists agree that three of those papers on brownian motion the 
photoelectric effect and special relativity deserved nobel prizes only the 
paper on the photoelectric effect would be mentioned by the nobel committee in 
the award this is ironic not only because einstein is far better known for 
relativity but also because the photoelectric effect is a quantum phenomenon 
and einstein became somewhat disenchanted with the path quantum theory would 
take in each of these papers einstein boldly took an idea from theoretical 
physics to its logical consequences and managed to explain experimental results 
that had baffled scientists for decades max planck and einstein annus mirabilis 
papers einstein submitted the series of papers to the annalen der physik they 
are commonly referred to as the annus mirabilis papers from annus mirabilis 
latin for year of wonders the international union of pure and applied physics 
iupap commemorated the one zero zero th year of the publication of einstein s 
extensive work in one nine zero five as the world year of physics two zero zero 
five the first paper named on a heuristic viewpoint concerning the production 
and transformation of light ber einen die erzeugung und verwandlung des lichtes 
betreffenden heuristischen gesichtspunkt proposed that energy quanta which are 
essentially what we now call photons were real and showed how they could be 
used to explain such phenomena as the photoelectric effect this paper was 
specifically cited for his nobel prize max planck had made the formal 
assumption that energy was quantized in deriving his black body radiation law 
published in one nine zero one but had considered this to be no more than a 
mathematical trick the photoelectric effect thus provided a simple confirmation 
of max planck s hypothesis of quanta his second article in one nine zero five 
named on the motion required by the molecular kinetic theory of heat of small 
particles suspended in a stationary liquid ber die von der molekularkinetischen 
theorie der w rme geforderte bewegung von in ruhenden fl ssigkeiten 
suspendierten teilchen covered his study of brownian motion and provided 
empirical evidence for the existence of atoms before this paper atoms were 
recognized as a useful concept but physicists and chemists hotly debated 
whether atoms were real entities einstein s statistical discussion of atomic 
behavior gave experimentalists a way to count atoms by looking through an 
ordinary microscope wilhelm ostwald one of the leaders of the anti atom school 
later told arnold sommerfeld that he had been converted to a belief in atoms by 
einstein s complete explanation of brownian motion at the same time as einstein 
brownian motion was also described by smoluchowski einstein s third paper that 
year on the electrodynamics of moving bodies zur elektrodynamik bewegter k rper 
was published in september one nine zero five this paper introduced the special 
theory of relativity a theory of time distance mass and energy which was 
consistent with electromagnetism but omitted the force of gravity while 
developing this paper einstein wrote to mileva about our work on relative 
motion and this has led some to ask whether mileva played a part in its 
development a few historians of science believe that einstein and his wife were 
both aware that the famous frenchman henri poincar had already published the 
equations of relativity a few weeks before einstein submitted his paper most 
believe their work independent especially given einstein s isolation at this 
time a fourth paper does the inertia of a body depend upon its energy content 
ist die tr gheit eines k rpers von seinem energieinhalt abh ngig published late 
in one nine zero five showed one further deduction from relativity s axioms the 
famous equation that the energy of a body at rest e equals its mass m times the 
speed of light c squared e mc middle years einstein at the one nine one one 
solvay conference in one nine zero six einstein was promoted to technical 
examiner second class in one nine zero eight einstein was licensed in bern 
switzerland as a privatdozent unsalaried teacher at a university einstein s 
second son eduard was born on july two eight one nine one zero at this time he 
described why the sky is blue in his paper on the phenomenon of critical 
opalescence which shows the cumulative effect of scattering of light by 
individual molecules in the atmosphere in one nine one one einstein became 
first associate professor at the university of zurich and shortly afterwards 
full professor at the german university of prague only to return the following 
year to zurich in order to become full professor at the eth zurich at that time 
he worked closely with the mathematician marcel grossmann in one nine one two 
einstein started to refer to time as the fourth dimension although h g wells 
had done this earlier in one eight nine five in the time machine in one nine 
one four just before the start of world war i einstein settled in berlin as 
professor at the local university and became a member of the prussian academy 
of sciences he took german citizenship his pacifism and jewish origins 
irritated german nationalists after he became world famous nationalistic hatred 
of him grew and for the first time he was the subject of an organized campaign 
to discredit his theories from one nine one four to one nine three three he 
served as director of the kaiser wilhelm institute for physics in berlin and it 
was during this time that he was awarded his nobel prize and made his most 
groundbreaking discoveries he was also an extraordinary professor at the leiden 
university from one nine two zero until officially one nine four six where he 
regularly gave guest lectures in one nine one seven einstein published on the 
quantum mechanics of radiation zur quantenmechanik der strahlung physkalische 
zeitschrift one eight one two one one two eight this article introduced the 
concept of stimulated emission the physical principle that allows light 
amplification in the laser he also published a paper that year that used the 
general theory of relativity to model the behavior of the entire universe 
setting the stage for modern cosmology in this work he created his self 
described worst blunder the cosmological constant einstein divorced mileva on 
february one four one nine one nine and married his cousin elsa l wenthal born 
einstein l wenthal was the surname of her first husband max on june two one 
nine one nine elsa was albert s first cousin maternally and his second cousin 
paternally she was three years older than albert and had nursed him to health 
after he had suffered a partial nervous breakdown combined with a severe 
stomach ailment there were no children from this marriage the fate of albert 
and mileva s first child lieserl is unknown some believe she died in infancy 
while others believe she was given out for adoption they later had two sons 
eduard and hans albert eduard intended to practice as a freudian analyst but 
was institutionalized for schizophrenia and died in an asylum hans albert his 
older brother became a professor of hydraulic engineering at the university of 
california berkeley having little interaction with his father einstein theory 
triumphs declared the new york times on november one zero one nine one nine 
general relativity in november one nine one five einstein presented a series of 
lectures before the prussian academy of sciences in which he described his 
theory of gravity known as general relativity the final lecture climaxed with 
his introduction of an equation that replaced newton s law of gravity the field 
equation which was first derived from a variational principle by david hilbert 
this theory considered all observers to be equivalent not only those moving at 
a uniform speed in general relativity gravity is no longer a force as it is in 
newton s law of gravity but is a consequence of the curvature of space time the 
theory provided the foundation for the study of cosmology and gave scientists 
the tools for understanding many features of the universe that were discovered 
well after einstein s death a truly revolutionary theory general relativity has 
so far passed every test posed to it and has become a powerful tool used in the 
analysis of many subjects in physics initially scientists were skeptical 
because the theory was derived by mathematical reasoning and rational analysis 
not by experiment or observation but in one nine one nine predictions made 
using the theory were confirmed by arthur eddington s measurements during a 
solar eclipse of how much the light emanating from a star was bent by the sun s 
gravity when it passed close to the sun an effect called gravitational lensing 
the observations were carried out on may two nine one nine one nine at two 
locations one in sobral cear brazil and another in the island of principe in 
the west coast of africa on november seven the times reported the confirmation 
cementing einstein s fame many scientists were still unconvinced for various 
reasons ranging from disagreement with einstein s interpretation of the 
experiments to not being able to tolerate the absence of an absolute frame of 
reference in einstein s view many of them simply could not understand the 
mathematics involved einstein s public fame which followed the one nine one 
nine article created resentment among these scientists some of which lasted 
well into the one nine three zero s in the early one nine two zero s einstein 
was the lead figure in a famous weekly physics colloquium at the university of 
berlin on march three zero one nine two one einstein went to new york to give a 
lecture on his new theory of relativity the same year he was awarded the nobel 
prize though he is now most famous for his work on relativity it was for his 
earlier work on the photoelectric effect that he was given the prize as his 
work on general relativity was still disputed the nobel committee decided that 
citing his less contested theory in the prize would gain more acceptance from 
the scientific community sir edmund whittaker one nine five three stated that 
david hilbert published the theory of general relativity nearly simultaneously 
with einstein the copenhagen interpretation einstein and niels bohr sparred 
over quantum theory during the one nine two zero s einstein s postulation that 
light can be described not only as a wave with no kinetic energy but also as 
massless discrete packets of energy called quanta with measurable kinetic 
energy now known as photons was a landmark break with the classical physics in 
one nine zero nine einstein presented his first paper on the quantification of 
light to a gathering of physicists and told them that they must find some way 
to understand waves and particles together in the mid one nine two zero s as 
the original quantum theory was replaced with a new theory of quantum mechanics 
einstein balked at the copenhagen interpretation of the new equations because 
it settled for a probabilistic non visualizable account of physical behaviour 
einstein agreed that the theory was the best available but he looked for a more 
complete explanation i e more deterministic he could not abandon the belief 
that physics described the laws that govern real things the belief which had 
led to his successes with atoms photons and gravity in a one nine two six 
letter to max born einstein made a remark that is now famous quantum mechanics 
is certainly imposing but an inner voice tells me it is not yet the real thing 
the theory says a lot but does not really bring us any closer to the secret of 
the old one i at any rate am convinced that he does not throw dice to this bohr 
who sparred with einstein on quantum theory retorted stop telling god what he 
must do the bohr einstein debates on foundational aspects of quantum mechanics 
happened during the solvay conferences einstein was not rejecting probabilistic 
theories per se einstein himself was a great statistician using statistical 
analysis in his works on brownian motion and photoelectricity and in papers 
published before the miraculous year one nine zero five einstein had even 
discovered gibbs ensembles he believed however that at the core reality behaved 
deterministically many physicists argue that experimental evidence 
contradicting this belief was found much later with the discovery of bell s 
theorem and bell s inequality nonetheless there is still space for lively 
discussions about the interpretation of quantum mechanics bose einstein 
statistics in one nine two four einstein received a short paper from a young 
indian physicist named satyendra nath bose describing light as a gas of photons 
and asking for einstein s assistance in publication einstein realized that the 
same statistics could be applied to atoms and published an article in german 
then the lingua franca of physics which described bose s model and explained 
its implications bose einstein statistics now describe any assembly of these 
indistinguishable particles known as bosons the bose einstein condensate 
phenomenon was predicted in the one nine two zero s by bose and einstein based 
on bose s work on the statistical mechanics of photons which was then 
formalized and generalized by einstein the first such condensate was produced 
by eric cornell and carl wieman in one nine nine five at the university of 
colorado at boulder einstein s original sketches on this theory were recovered 
in august two zero zero five in the library of leiden university einstein also 
assisted erwin schr dinger in the development of the quantum boltzmann 
distribution a mixed classical and quantum mechanical gas model although he 
realized that this was less significant than the bose einstein model and 
declined to have his name included on the paper the einstein refrigerator 
einstein and szil rd s refrigerator patent diagram einstein and former student 
le szil rd co invented a unique type of refrigerator usually called the 
einstein refrigerator in one nine two six on november one one one nine three 
zero was awarded to albert einstein and le szil rd the patent covered a 
thermodynamic refrigeration cycle providing cooling with no moving parts at a 
constant pressure with only heat as an input the refrigeration cycle used 
ammonia butane and water world war ii when adolf hitler came to power in 
january one nine three three einstein was a guest professor at princeton 
university a position which he took in december one nine three two after a 
invitation from the american educator abraham flexner in one nine three three 
the nazis passed the law of the restoration of the civil service which forced 
all jewish university professors out of their jobs and throughout the one nine 
three zero s a campaign to label einstein s work as jewish physics in contrast 
with german or aryan physics was led by nobel laureates philipp lenard and 
johannes stark with the assistance of the ss the deutsche physik supporters 
worked to publish pamplets and textbooks denigrating einstein s theories and 
attempted to politically blacklist german physicists who taught them notably 
werner heisenberg einstein renounced his german citizenship and stayed in the 
united states where he was given permanent residency he accepted a position at 
the newly founded institute for advanced study in princeton township new jersey 
he became an american citizen in one nine four zero though he still retained 
swiss citizenship in one nine three nine under the encouragement of szil rd 
einstein sent a letter to president franklin delano roosevelt urging the study 
of nuclear fission for military purposes under fears that the nazi government 
would be first to develop atomic weapons roosevelt started a small 
investigation into the matter which eventually became the massive manhattan 
project einstein himself did not work on the bomb project however the 
international rescue committee was founded one nine three three at the request 
of albert einstein to assist opponents of adolf hitler for more information see 
the section below on einstein s political views institute for advanced study 
his work at the institute for advanced study focused on the unification of the 
laws of physics which he referred to as the unified field theory he attempted 
to construct a model which would describe all of the fundamental forces as 
different manifestations of a single force this took the form of an attempt to 
unify the gravitational and electrodynamic forces his attempt was hindered 
because the strong and weak nuclear forces were not understood independently 
until around one nine seven zero fifteen years after einstein s death einstein 
s goal of unifying the laws of physics under a single model survives in the 
current drive for unification of the forces embodied most notably by string 
theory generalized theory einstein began to form a generalized theory of 
gravitation with the universal law of gravitation and the electromagnetic force 
in his first attempt to demonstrate the unification and simplification of the 
fundamental forces in one nine five zero he described his work in a scientific 
american article einstein was guided by a belief in a single statistical 
measure of variance for the entire set of physical laws einstein s generalized 
theory of gravitation is a universal mathematical approach to field theory he 
investigated reducing the different phenomena by the process of logic to 
something already known or evident einstein tried to unify gravity and 
electromagnetism in a way that also led to a new subtle understanding of 
quantum mechanics einstein postulated a four dimensional space time continuum 
expressed in axioms represented by five component vectors particles appear in 
his research as a limited region in space in which the field strength or the 
energy density are particularly high einstein treated subatomic particles as 
objects embedded in the unified field influencing it and existing as an 
essential constituent of the unified field but not of it einstein also 
investigated a natural generalization of symmetrical tensor fields treating the 
combination of two parts of the field as being a natural procedure of the total 
field and not the symmetrical and antisymmetrical parts separately he 
researched a way to delineate the equations and systems to be derived from a 
variational principle einstein became increasingly isolated in his research on 
a generalised theory of gravitation and was ultimately unsuccessful in his 
attempts in particular his pursuit of a unification of the fundamental forces 
ignored work in the physics community at large most notably the discovery of 
the strong nuclear force and weak nuclear force einstein s two story house 
white frame with front porch in greek revival style in princeton one one two 
mercer street final years in one nine four eight einstein served on the 
original committee which resulted in the founding of brandeis university a 
portrait of einstein was taken by yousuf karsh on february one one of that same 
year in one nine five two the israeli government proposed to einstein that he 
take the post of second president he declined the offer and remains the only 
united states citizen ever to be offered a position as a foreign head of state 
on march three zero one nine five three einstein released a revised unified 
field theory he died at one one five am in princeton hospital in princeton new 
jersey on april one eight one nine five five at the age of seven six from 
internal bleeding which was caused by the rupture of an aortic aneurism leaving 
the generalized theory of gravitation unsolved the only person present at his 
deathbed a hospital nurse said that just before his death he mumbled several 
words in german that she did not understand he was cremated without ceremony on 
the same day he died at trenton new jersey in accordance with his wishes his 
ashes were scattered at an undisclosed location an autopsy was performed on 
einstein by dr thomas stoltz harvey who removed and preserved his brain harvey 
found nothing unusual with his brain but in one nine nine nine further analysis 
by a team at mcmaster university revealed that his parietal operculum region 
was missing and to compensate his inferior parietal lobe was one five wider 
than normal the inferior parietal region is responsible for mathematical 
thought visuospatial cognition and imagery of movement einstein s brain also 
contained seven three more glial cells than the average brain personality 
albert einstein was much respected for his kind and friendly demeanor rooted in 
his pacifism he was modest about his abilities and had distinctive attitudes 
and fashions for example he minimized his wardrobe so that he would not need to 
waste time in deciding on what to wear he was captivatingly simple wearing 
mothy sweaters and sweatshirts and sans socks in his old age he occasionally 
had a playful sense of humor and enjoyed sailing and playing the violin he was 
also the stereotypical bumbling absent minded professor he was often forgetful 
of everyday items such as keys and would focus so intently on solving physics 
problems that he would often become oblivious to his surroundings in his later 
years his appearance inadvertently created or reflected another stereotype of 
scientist in the process the researcher with unruly white hair religious views 
although he was raised jewish he was not a believer in the religious aspect of 
judaism though he still considered himself a jew he simply admired the beauty 
of nature and the universe from a letter written in english dated march two 
four one nine five four einstein wrote it was of course a lie what you read 
about my religious convictions a lie which is being systematically repeated i 
do not believe in a personal god and i have never denied this but have 
expressed it clearly if something is in me which can be called religious then 
it is the unbounded admiration for the structure of the world so far as our 
science can reveal it he also said in an essay reprinted in living philosophies 
vol one three one nine three one a knowledge of the existence of something we 
cannot penetrate our perceptions of the profoundest reason and the most radiant 
beauty which only in their most primitive forms are accessible to our minds it 
is this knowledge and this emotion that constitute true religiosity in this 
sense and this sense alone i am a deeply religious man the following is a 
response made to rabbi herbert goldstein of the international synagogue in new 
york which read i believe in spinoza s god who reveals himself in the orderly 
harmony of what exists not in a god who concerns himself with the fates and 
actions of human beings after being pressed on his religious views by martin 
buber einstein exclaimed what we physicists strive for is just to draw his 
lines after him he also quoted once when i read the bhagavad gita i ask myself 
how god created the universe everything else seems superfluous summarizing his 
religious beliefs he once said my religion consists of a humble admiration of 
the illimitable superior spirit who reveals himself in the slight details we 
are able to perceive with our frail and feeble mind einstein was an honorary 
associate of the rationalist press association beginning in one nine three four 
and was an admirer of ethical culture political views einstein and solomon 
mikhoels the chairman of the soviet jewish anti fascist committee in one nine 
four three einstein considered himself a pacifist and humanitarian and in later 
years a committed democratic socialist he once said i believe gandhi s views 
were the most enlightened of all the political men of our time we should strive 
to do things in his spirit not to use violence for fighting for our cause but 
by non participation of anything you believe is evil einstein s views on other 
issues including socialism mccarthyism and racism were controversial in a one 
nine four nine article entitled why socialism albert einstein described the 
predatory phase of human development exemplified by a chaotic capitalist 
society as a source of evil to be overcome he disapproved of the totalitarian 
regimes in the soviet union and elsewhere and argued in favor of a democratic 
socialist system which would combine a planned economy with a deep respect for 
human rights einstein was a co founder of the liberal german democratic party 
and a member of the afl cio affiliated union the american federation of 
teachers einstein was very much involved in the civil rights movement he was a 
close friend of paul robeson for over two zero years einstein was a member of 
several civil rights groups including the princeton chapter of the naacp many 
of which were headed by paul robeson he served as co chair with paul robeson of 
the american crusade to end lynching when w e b dubois was frivolously charged 
with being a communist spy during the mccarthy era while he was in his eight 
zero s einstein volunteered as a character witness in the case the case was 
dismissed shortly after it was announced that he was to appear in that capacity 
einstein was quoted as saying that racism is america s greatest disease the u s 
fbi kept a one four two seven page file on his activities and recommended that 
he be barred from immigrating to the united states under the alien exclusion 
act alleging that einstein believes in advises advocates or teaches a doctrine 
which in a legal sense as held by the courts in other cases would allow anarchy 
to stalk in unmolested and result in government in name only among other 
charges they also alleged that einstein was a member sponsor or affiliated with 
thirty four communist fronts between one nine three seven one nine five four 
and also served as honorary chairman for three communist organizations it 
should be noted that many of the documents in the file were submitted to the 
fbi mainly by civilian political groups and not actually written by fbi 
officials in one nine three nine einstein signed a letter written by le szil rd 
to president roosevelt arguing that the united states should start funding 
research into the development of nuclear weapons einstein opposed tyrannical 
forms of government and for this reason and his jewish background opposed the 
nazi regime and fled germany shortly after it came to power at the same time 
einstein s anarchist nephew carl einstein who shared many of his views was 
fighting the fascists in the spanish civil war einstein initially favored 
construction of the atomic bomb in order to ensure that hitler did not do so 
first and even sent a letter to president roosevelt dated august two one nine 
three nine before world war ii broke out and probably written by le szil rd 
encouraging him to initiate a program to create a nuclear weapon roosevelt 
responded to this by setting up a committee for the investigation of using 
uranium as a weapon which in a few years was superseded by the manhattan 
project after the war though einstein lobbied for nuclear disarmament and a 
world government i do not know how the third world war will be fought but i can 
tell you what they will use in the fourth rocks einstein was a supporter of 
zionism he supported jewish settlement of the ancient seat of judaism and was 
active in the establishment of the hebrew university in jerusalem which 
published one nine three zero a volume titled about zionism speeches and 
lectures by professor albert einstein and to which einstein bequeathed his 
papers however he opposed nationalism and expressed skepticism about whether a 
jewish nation state was the best solution he may have imagined jews and arabs 
living peacefully in the same land in later life in one nine five two he was 
offered the post of second president of the newly created state of israel but 
declined the offer claiming that he lacked the necessary people skills einstein 
was disturbed by the violence taking place in the palestine after the second 
world war and expressed that he was disappointed with the jewish ultra 
nationalist organization irgun and stern gang nonetheless einstein remained 
deeply committed to the welfare of israel and the jewish people for the rest of 
his life einstein along with albert schweitzer and bertrand russell fought 
against nuclear tests and bombs as his last public act and just days before his 
death he signed the russell einstein manifesto which led to the pugwash 
conferences on science and world affairs his letter to russell read dear 
bertrand russell thank you for your letter of april five i am gladly willing to 
sign your excellent statement i also agree with your choice of the prospective 
signers with kind regards a einstein nationality german swiss or american 
einstein was born a german citizen at the age of seventeen on january two eight 
one eight nine six he was released from the german citizenship by his own 
request and with the approval of his father he remained stateless for five 
years on february two one one nine zero one he gained swiss citizenship which 
he never revoked einstein regained german citizenship in april one nine one 
four when he entered german civil service but due to the political situation 
and the persecution of jewish people in nazi germany he left civil service in 
march one nine three three and thus also lost the german citizenship on october 
one one nine four zero einstein became an american citizen he remained both an 
american and a swiss citizen until his death on april one eight one nine five 
five popularity and cultural impact einstein s popularity has led to widespread 
use of einstein in advertising and merchandising including the registration of 
albert einstein as a trademark the photo detail from the original of this 
humorous expression was taken during einstein s birthday on march one four one 
nine five one upi entertainment albert einstein has become the subject of a 
number of novels films and plays including jean claude carrier s two zero zero 
five french novel einstein s il vous plait please mr einstein nicolas roeg s 
film insignificance fred schepisi s film i q alan lightman s novel einstein s 
dreams and steve martin s comedic play picasso at the lapin agile he was the 
subject of philip glass s groundbreaking one nine seven six opera einstein on 
the beach his humorous side is also the subject of ed metzger s one man play 
albert einstein the practical bohemian he is often used as a model for 
depictions of eccentric scientists in works of fiction his own character and 
distinctive hairstyle suggest eccentricity or even lunacy and are widely copied 
or exaggerated time magazine writer frederic golden referred to einstein as a 
cartoonist s dream come true on einstein s seven two nd birthday in one nine 
five one the upi photographer arthur sasse was trying to coax him into smiling 
for the camera having done this for the photographer many times that day 
einstein stuck out his tongue instead the image has become an icon in pop 
culture for its contrast of the genius scientist displaying a moment of levity 
yahoo serious an australian film maker used the photo as an inspiration for the 
intentionally anachronistic movie young einstein licensing einstein bequeathed 
his estate as well as the use of his image see personality rights to the hebrew 
university of jerusalem einstein actively supported the university during his 
life and this support continues with the royalties received from licensing 
activities the roger richman agency licences the commercial use of the name 
albert einstein and associated imagery and likenesses of einstein as agent for 
the hebrew university of jerusalem as head licensee the agency can control 
commercial usage of einstein s name which does not comply with certain 
standards e g when einstein s name is used as a trademark the symbol must be 
used as of may two zero zero five the roger richman agency was acquired by 
corbis honors einstein on the cover of time as person of the century einstein 
has received a number of posthumous honors for example in one nine nine two he 
was ranked one zero on michael h hart s list of the most influential figures in 
history in one nine nine nine he was named person of the century by time 
magazine also in one nine nine nine gallup recorded him as the fourth most 
admired person of the two zero th century the year two zero zero five was 
designated as the world year of physics by unesco for its coinciding with the 
centennial of the annus mirabilis papers celebrated at the einstein symposium 
among einstein s many namesakes are a unit used in photochemistry the einstein 
the chemical element nine nine einsteinium the asteroid two zero zero one 
einstein the albert einstein peace prize the albert einstein college of 
medicine of yeshiva university was named after einstein upon his death in one 
nine five five the albert einstein medical center in philadelphia pa see also 
special relativity general relativity history of special relativity history of 
general relativity henri poincar david hilbert priority disputes about einstein 
and the relativity theories works by albert einstein clay portrait of einstein 
by the sculptor moshe ziffer the investigation of the state of aether in 
magnetic fields pdf ideas mein weltbild isbn zero five one seven eight eight 
four four one zero project gutenberg e text on the electrodynamics of moving 
bodies annalen der physik june three zero one nine zero five does the inertia 
of a body depend upon its energy content annalen der physik september two seven 
one nine zero five inaugural lecture to the prussian academy of sciences one 
nine one four pdf the foundation of the general theory of relativity annalen 
der physik four nine one nine one six one nine two one nobel lecture in physics 
nordic assembly of naturalists at gothenburg one one july one nine two three 
einstein a lorenz h a weyl h and minkowski h the principle of relativity trans 
w perrett and g b jeffery new york dover publications one nine two three why 
socialism monthly review may one nine four nine original manuscript on the 
generalized theory of gravitation april one nine five zero references the 
albert einstein memorial washington dc at the national academy of sciences in 
washington dc abstract and link to full text this is the definitive scientific 
biography this book discusses non science aspects of einstein marriages affairs 
illegitimate daughter public image discusses the final disposition of einstein 
s brain hair and eyes as well as the importance of einstein and his work in the 
shaping of science and culture notes the exceptional brain of albert einstein 
see also people speculated to have been autistic highfield ibid galison p three 
six eight galison p three seven zero david hilbert actually published the field 
equation in an article dated five days before einstein s lecture but according 
to thorne pp one one seven one one eight hilbert had discovered the correct 
derivation after mulling over things he had learned on a recent visit by 
einstein to gottingen however thorne goes on to say quite naturally and in 
accord with hilbert s view of things the resulting law of warpage was quickly 
given the name the einstein field equation rather than being named after 
hilbert hilbert had carried out the last few mathematical steps to its 
discovery independently and almost simultaneously with einstein but einstein 
was responsible for essentially everything that preceded those steps the 
recognition that tidal gravity must be the same thing as a warpage of spacetime 
the vision that the law of warpage must obey the reativity principle and the 
first nine zero percent of that law the einstein field equation in fact without 
einstein the general relativistic laws of gravity might not have been 
discovered until several decades later see priority disputes about einstein and 
the relativity theories for more details ibid calaprice p one seven three 
external links nobel prize in physics the nobel prize in physics one nine two 
one albert einstein annalen der physik works by einstein digitalized at the 
university of applied sciences in jena fachhochschule jena s morgan friedman 
albert einstein online comprehensive listing of online resources about einstein 
time magazine one zero zero albert einstein albert einstein quotes hundreds of 
famous albert einstein quotes audio excerpts of famous speeches e mc and 
relativity impossibility of atomic energy arms race from time magazine archives 
leiden university einstein archive pbs einstein s letter to roosevelt pbs nova 
einstein pbs einstein s wife mileva maric fbi fbi files investigation regarding 
affiliation with the communist party university of frankfurt einstein family 
pictures salon com did einstein cheat albert einstein biography from german 
american corner history and heritage official einstein archives online einstein 
s manuscripts albert einstein archive einstein papers project max planck 
institute living einstein american institute of physics albert einstein 
includes his life and work audio files and full site available as a 
downloadable pdf for classroom use american museum of natural history albert 
einstein the albert einstein institution the economist one zero zero years of 
einstein einstein home distributed computing project searching for 
gravitational waves predicted by einstein s theories world year of physics two 
zero zero five a celebration of einstein s miracle year einstein year two zero 
zero five the guardian einstein s pacifist dilemma revealed einstein s theory 
of relativity in words of four letters or fewer rabindranath tagore s 
conversation with einstein protest against the suppression of hebrew in the 
soviet union one nine three zero one nine three one einstein on race einstein 
brochure pdf one zero zero years special theory of relativity two zero zero 
five albert einstein profile at supernatural minds everyone loves einstein the 
oxonian review of books one eight seven nine births one nine five five deaths 
natives of baden w rttemberg albert einstein physicists autodidacts 
contributors to general relativity cosmologists formerly stateless people 
german physicists german americans humanists humanitarians jewish american 
scientists jewish scientists manhattan project naturalized citizens of the 
united states nobel prize in physics winners patent clerks refugees social 
justice socialists vegetarians world federalists agnostics afghanistan pashto 
dari persian af nist n is a landlocked country at the crossroads of asia 
generally considered a part of central asia it is sometimes ascribed to a 
regional bloc in either south asia or the middle east as it has cultural ethno 
linguistic and geographic links with most of its neighbors it is bordered by 
iran in the west pakistan in the south and east turkmenistan uzbekistan and 
tajikistan in the north and china to the east it has a population of three zero 
million people although this remains an estimate as no official census has been 
taken for decades afghanistan literally translates to land of the afghans but a 
plethora of other names have been applied to its general location in the past 
between the fall of the taliban after the u s invasion of afghanistan and the 
two zero zero three loya jirga afghanistan was referred to by the government of 
the united states as the transitional islamic state of afghanistan under its 
new constitution the country is now officially named the islamic republic of 
afghanistan origin and history of the name the name of afghanistan derives from 
word afghan the pushtuns appear to have begun using the term afghan as a name 
for themselves from the islamic period onwards according to w k frazier tyler m 
c gillet and several other scholars the word afghan first appears in history in 
the hudud al alam in nine eight two ad there are numerous views regarding the 
origin of name afghan most of them being purely speculative as can be seen 
below makhzan i afghni by nematullah written in one six one two ce traces the 
afghan or pakhtun origin from the super patriarch abraham down to one named 
king talut or saul it states that saul had a son irmia jeremia who had a son 
called afghana upon the death of king saul afghana was raised by david and was 
later promoted to the chief command of the army during the reign of king 
solomon the progeny of this afghana multiplied numerously and came to be called 
bani israel in the sixth century bce bakhtunnasar or nebuchadnezzar king of 
babul attacked judah and exiled the progeny of afghana to ghor located in the 
center of what is now afghanistan in course of time the exiled community came 
to be addressed as afghan after the name of their ancestor and the country got 
its name as afghanistan this traditional view has many historical discrepancies 
and is therefore not accepted by modern scholarship the last pleader for the 
bani israel hypothesis being mayor raverty the pathans one nine five eight olaf 
caroe another version of pushtun legend places afghana the professed eponymous 
ancestor of the afghans or pushtuns as a contemporary of muslim prophet 
mohammad on hearing about the new faith of islam qais from aryana travelled to 
medina to see the muslim prophet muhammad and returned to aryana as a muslim 
qais abdur rashid purportedly had many sons one of whom was afghana afghana in 
turn had four sons who set out to the east to establish their separate lineages 
the first son went to swat the second to lahore and india the third to multan 
and the last one to quetta this legend is one of many traditional tales amongst 
the pashtuns regarding their disparate origins again it was this legendary 
afghana who is stated to have given the pushtuns their current name it is 
notable that the afghan of this legend is separated from the afghana of solomon 
s times by at least one one centuries dr h w bellew in his book an enquiry into 
the ethnography of afghanistan believes that the name afghan derives from the 
latin term alban used by armenians as alvan or alwan which refers to 
mountaineers and in the case of transliterated armenian characters would be 
pronounced as aghvan or aghwan to the persians this would further be altered to 
aoghan avghan and afghan as a reference to the highlanders or mountaineers of 
the eastern iranian plateau some people hold that the name derives from abagan 
i e without god which term the persians are stated to have coined for the 
pushtuns to describe them as godless or non believers it is claimed that word 
abagan is antonym of the word bagan believer in god just as word apolitical is 
antonym of political in the english language there are also a few people who 
link afghan to an uzbek word avagan said to mean original still others believe 
that the name derives from sanskrit upa ganah said to mean allied tribes 
another etymological view is that the name afghan evidently derives from 
sanskrit ashvaka or ashvakan q v the assakenoi of arrian this view was 
propounded by j w mccrindle and is supported by numerous modern scholars 
including c lassen s martin bishop crooks w crooke j c vidyalnar m r singh p 
smith n l dey dr j l kamboj s kirpal singh and several others in sanskrit word 
ashva iranian aspa prakrit assa means horse and ashvaka prakrit assaka means 
horseman pre christian times knew the people of eastern afghanistan as ashvakas 
horsemen since they raised a fine breed of horses and had a reputation for 
providing expert cavalrymen the fifth century bce indian grammarian panini 
calls them ashvayana and ashvakayana classical writers use the respective 
equivalents aspasios or aspasii hippasii and assakenois or assaceni assacani 
asscenus the aspasios assakenois ashvakas cavalrymen is stated to be another 
name for the kambojas because of their equestrian characteristics see list of 
country name etymologies the last part of the name afghanistan originates from 
the persian word st n country or land the english word afghanland that appeared 
in various treaties between qajar persia and the united kingdom dealing with 
the eastern lands of the persian kingdom modern afghanistan was adopted by the 
afghans and became afghanistan before being called afghanistan the region had 
gone through several name changes in its long history of around five zero zero 
zero years one of the most ancient names according to historians and scholars 
was ariana the greek pronunciation of the ancient avestan aryanam vaeja or the 
sanskrit aryavarta land of the aryans today this old persian and avestan 
expression is preserved in the name iran and it is noted in the name of the 
afghan national airline ariana airlines the term ariana afghanistan is still 
popular amongst persian speakers in the country many centuries later 
afghanistan was part of greater khorasan and hence was recognized with the name 
khorasan along with regions centered around merv and neishabur which in pahlavi 
means the eastern land in persian dehkhoda p eight four five seven history 
afghanistan exists at a unique nexus point where numerous eurasian 
civilizations have interacted and often fought and was an important site of 
early historical activity through the ages the region today known as 
afghanistan has been invaded by a host of peoples including the aryans medes 
persians greeks mauryans kushans sassanians arabs turks british and soviets but 
rarely have these groups managed to exert complete control over the region on 
other occasions native afghan entities have invaded surrounding regions to form 
empires of their own buddhas of bamiyan dating back to one st century pre 
islamic afghanistan were the largest buddha statues in the world they were 
destroyed by the taliban in two zero zero one calling them us islamic photo by 
hadi zaheer between two zero zero zero and one two zero zero bce waves of indo 
european speaking aryans are thought to have flooded into modern day 
afghanistan setting up a nation that became known as ary n m x a ra or land of 
the aryans zoroastrianism is speculated to have possibly originated in 
afghanistan between one eight zero zero to eight zero zero bce ancient eastern 
iranian languages such as avestan may have been spoken in afghanistan around a 
similar time line with the rise of zoroastrianism around one zero zero zero bce 
or earlier the indo aryan vedic civilization may have arisen near the vicinity 
of the kabul valley of eastern afghanistan but this remains speculative as more 
viable theories based upon archaeological finds tend to support the emergence 
of the vedic civilization east of the indus and or ganges in what is today 
pakistan and india by the middle of the six th century bce the persian empire 
supplanted the medes and incorporated aryana within its boundaries and by three 
three zero bce alexander the great had invaded the region following alexander s 
brief occupation the hellenic successor states of the seleucids and bactrians 
controlled the area while the mauryans from india annexed the southeast for a 
time and introduced buddhism to the region until the area returned to the 
bactrian rule during the one st century ce the kushans a tocharian people from 
central asia with indo european origins occupied the region thereafter aryana 
fell to a number of eurasian tribes including parthians scythians and huns as 
well as the sassanian persians and local rulers such as the hindu shahis in 
kabul until the seven th century ce when muslim arab armies invaded the region 
the arabs initially annexed parts of western afghanistan in six five two and 
then conquered most of the rest of afghanistan between seven zero six seven 
zero nine ce and administered the region as khorasan and over time much of the 
local population converted to islam but retained their iranian languages 
afghanistan became the center of various important empires including the 
ghaznavid empire nine six two one one five one founded by a local turkic ruler 
from ghazni named yamin ul dawlah mahmud that expanded its suzerainty over a 
vast area from kurdistan to northern india this empire was replaced by the 
ghorid empire one one five one one two one nine founded by another local ruler 
this time of tajik extraction muhammad ghori whose domains included huge parts 
of central and south asia and laid the foundations for the delhi sultanate in 
india in one two one nine the region was overrun by the mongols under genghis 
khan who devastated the land their rule continued with the ilkhanates and was 
extended further following the invasion of tamerlane timur leng a ruler from 
central asia by one four zero zero all of afghanistan came under his dominion 
and he also laid the foundation of another islamic empire in india the mughal 
empire the uzbek born babur a descendant of both tamerlane and genghis khan 
established an empire with its capital at kabul by one five zero four and then 
expanded into south asia in one five two five and established the mughal empire 
s rule throughout much of what is today pakistan and northern india by one five 
two seven as the empire shifted eastward the safavids of persia challenged 
mughal rule while the two superpower empires of the day battled over the fate 
of afghanistan for decades with the persians acquiring the area by the mid one 
seven th century local ghilzai pashtun tribesmen lead by khan nashir 
successfully overthrew safavid rule and under the hotaki dynasty briefly 
controlled all or parts of persia itself from one seven two two to one seven 
three six following a brief period under the rule one seven three six one seven 
four seven of the turko iranian conqueror nadir shah one of his high ranking 
military officers ahmad shah abdali himself a pashtun tribesman of the abdali 
clan called for a loya jirga following nadir shah s assassination for which 
many implicate abdali in one seven four seven the afghans pashtuns came 
together at kandahar in one seven four seven and chose ahmad shah who changed 
his last name to durrani meaning pearl of pearls in persian to be king the 
afghanistan nation state as it is known today came into existence in one seven 
four seven as the durrani empire and expanded outward from traditional pashtun 
territories to include all of what is today afghanistan a portion of mashad in 
iran and all of pakistan and kashmir as well the durrani empire lasted for 
nearly a century until internecine conflict and wars with the persians and 
sikhs diminished their empire by the early one nine th century however the 
current borders of afghanistan would not be determined until the coming of the 
british during the one nine th century following the anglo afghan wars fought 
in one eight three nine one eight four two one eight seven eight one eight 
eight zero and lastly in one nine one nine afghanistan saw much of its 
territory and autonomy ceded to the united kingdom the united kingdom exercised 
a great deal of influence and it was not until king amanullah acceded to the 
throne in one nine one nine see the great game that afghanistan regained 
complete independence during the period of british intervention in afghanistan 
ethnic pashtun territories were divided by the durand line and this would lead 
to strained relations between afghanistan and british india and later the new 
state of pakistan over what came to be known as the pashtunistan debate the 
historical rulers of afghanistan were part of the abdali tribe of the ethnic 
afghans whose name was changed to durrani upon the accession of ahmad shah they 
belonged to the saddozay segment of the popalzay clan or to the mohammadzay 
segment of the barakzay clan of the ethnic afghans the mohammadzay frequently 
furnished the sadozay kings with top counselors who served occasionally as 
regents and identified with the name mohammadzay since one nine zero zero 
eleven monarchs and rulers have been unseated through undemocratic means in one 
nine one nine assassination one nine two nine abdication one nine two nine 
execution one nine three three assassination one nine seven three deposition 
one nine seven eight execution one nine seven nine execution one nine seven 
nine execution one nine eight seven removal one nine nine two overthrow one 
nine nine six overthrow and two zero zero one overthrow the longest period of 
stability in afghanistan was between one nine three three and one nine seven 
three when the country was under the rule of king zahir shah however in one 
nine seven three zahir s brother in law sardar mohammed daoud launched a 
bloodless coup daoud and his entire family were murdered in one nine seven 
eight when the communist people s democratic party of afghanistan launched a 
coup known as the great saur revolution and took over the government opposition 
against and conflict within the series of communist governments that followed 
was considerable as part of a cold war strategy the us government began to 
covertly fund and train anti government mujahideen forces through the pakistani 
secret service agency known as inter services intelligence or isi which were 
derived from discontented muslims in the country who opposed the official 
atheism of the marxist regime in one nine seven eight in order to bolster the 
local communist forces the soviet union citing the one nine seven eight treaty 
of friendship cooperation and good neighborliness that had been signed between 
the two countries in one nine seven eight intervened on december two four one 
nine seven nine the soviet occupation resulted in a mass exodus of over five 
million afghans who moved into refugee camps in neighboring pakistan and iran 
more than three million alone settled in pakistan faced with mounting 
international pressure and the loss of approximately one five zero zero zero 
soviet soldiers as a result of mujahideen opposition forces trained by the 
united states pakistan and other foreign governments the soviets withdrew ten 
years later in one nine eight nine for more details see soviet war in 
afghanistan the soviet withdrawal was seen as an ideological victory in the us 
which ostensibly had backed the mujahideen in order to counter soviet influence 
in the vicinity of the oil rich persian gulf following the removal of the 
soviet forces in one nine eight nine the us and its allies lost interest in 
afghanistan and did little to help rebuild the war ravaged country the ussr 
continued to support the regime of dr najubullah formerly the head of the 
secret service khad until its downfall in one nine nine two however the absence 
of the soviet forces resulted in the downfall of the government as it steadily 
lost ground to the guerrilla forces as the vast majority of the elites and 
intellectuals had either been systematically eliminated by the communists or 
escaped to take refuge abroad a dangerous leadership vacuum came into existence 
fighting continued among the various mujahidin factions eventually giving rise 
to a state of warlordism the chaos and corruption that dominated post soviet 
afghanistan in turn spawned the rise of the taliban in response to the growing 
chaos the most serious fighting during this growing civil conflict occurred in 
one nine nine four when one zero zero zero zero people were killed during 
factional fighting in kabul exploiting the chaotic situation in afghanistan a 
few regional bedfellows including fundamentalist afghans trained in refugee 
camps in western pakistan the pakistani secret intelligence service isi the 
regional mafia well established network that smuggled mainly japanese 
electronics and tyres before the russian invasion now involved in drug 
smuggling and arab extremist groups that were looking for a safe operational 
hub joined forces and helped to create the taliban movement rashid two zero 
zero zero backed by pakistan saudi arabia and other strategic allies the 
taliban developed as a politico religious force and eventually seized power in 
one nine nine six the taliban were able to capture nine zero of the country 
aside from the afghan northern alliance strongholds primarily found in the 
northeast in the panjshir valley the taliban sought to impose a strict 
interpretation of islamic sharia law and gave safe haven and assistance to 
individuals and organizations that were implicated as terrorists most notably 
osama bin laden s al qaeda network the united states and allied military action 
in support of the opposition following the september one one two zero zero one 
terrorist attacks forced the taliban s downfall in late two zero zero one major 
leaders from the afghan opposition groups and diaspora met in bonn and agreed 
on a plan for the formulation of a new government structure that resulted in 
the inauguration of hamid karzai as chairman of the afghan interim authority 
aia on december two zero zero one after a nationwide loya jirga in two zero 
zero two karzai was elected president on march three and march two five two 
zero zero two a series of earthquakes struck afghanistan with a loss of 
thousands of homes and over one eight zero zero lives over four zero zero zero 
more people were injured the earthquakes occurred at samangan province march 
three and baghlan province march two five the latter was the worse of the two 
and caused most of the casualties international authorities assisted the afghan 
government in dealing with the situation as the country continues to rebuild 
and recover as of late two zero zero five it was still struggling against 
widespread poverty continued warlordism a virtually non existent infrastructure 
possibly the largest concentration of land mines on earth and other unexploded 
ordinance as well as a sizable illegal poppy and heroin trade afghanistan also 
remains subject to occasionally violent political jockeying and the nation s 
first elections were successfully held in two zero zero four as women 
parliamentarians were selected in record numbers parliamentary elections in two 
zero zero five helped to further stabilize the country politically in spite of 
the numerous problems it faced including inadequate international assistance 
the country continues to grapple with occasional acts of violence from a few 
remaining al qaeda and taliban and the instability caused by warlords see also 
afghanistan timeline invasions of afghanistan politics main article politics of 
afghanistan afghanistan is currently led by president hamid karzai who was 
elected in october of two zero zero four before the election karzai led the 
country after having been hand picked by the administration of united states 
president bush to head an interim government after the fall of the taliban his 
current cabinet includes members of the afghan northern alliance and a mix from 
other regional and ethnic groups formed from the transitional government by the 
loya jirga grand council former monarch mohammed zahir shah returned to the 
country but was not reinstated as king and only exercises limited ceremonial 
powers under the bonn agreement the afghan constitution commission was 
established to consult with the public and formulate a draft constitution the 
meeting of a constitutional loya jirga was held in december two zero zero three 
when a new constitution was adopted creating a presidential form of government 
with a bicameral legislature troops and intelligence agencies from the united 
states and a number of other countries are present some to keep the peace 
others assigned to hunt for remnants of the taliban and al qaeda a united 
nations peacekeeping force called the international security assistance force 
has been operating in kabul since december two zero zero one nato took control 
of this force on august one one two zero zero three some of the country remains 
under the control of warlords on march two seven two zero zero three afghan 
deputy defense minister and powerful warlord general abdul rashid dostum 
created an office for the north zone of afghanistan and appointed officials to 
it defying then interim president hamid karzai s orders that there be no zones 
in afghanistan eurocorps took over the responsibility for the nato led isaf in 
kabul august nine two zero zero four national elections were held on october 
nine two zero zero four over one zero million afghans were registered to vote 
most of the one seven candidates opposing karzai boycotted the election 
charging fraud an independent commission found evidence of fraud but ruled that 
it did not affect the outcome of the poll karzai won five five four of the vote 
he was inaugurated as president on december seven it was the country s first 
national election since one nine six nine when parliamentary elections were 
last held on september one eight two zero zero five parliamentary elections 
were held the parliament opened on the following december one nine on december 
two zero karzai s close ally and president of the first mujahideen government 
sibghatullah mojadeddi was picked to head the one zero two seat upper house on 
december two one yunus qanuni afghan opposition leader and karzai s main 
opponent was chosen to lead the two four nine seat lower house of parliament 
with one two two votes against one one seven for his closest challenger see 
also list of leaders of afghanistan list of afghanistan governors subdivisions 
afghanistan is divided into three four provinces velayat which are further 
divided into districts main article provinces of afghanistan main article 
districts of afghanistan the three four provinces are geography map of 
afghanistan main article geography of afghanistan afghanistan is a land locked 
mountainous country with plains in the north and southwest the highest point at 
seven four eight five m two four five five seven ft above sea level is nowshak 
large parts of the country are dry and fresh water supplies are limited 
afghanistan has a continental climate with hot summers and cold winters the 
country is frequently subject to earthquakes the major cities of afghanistan 
are its capital kabul herat jalalabad mazar e sharif and kandahar see also list 
of cities in afghanistan places in afghanistan economy main article economy of 
afghanistan afghanistan is an extremely impoverished country being one of the 
world s poorest and least developed countries two thirds of the population 
lives on less than us two a day the economy has suffered greatly from the 
recent political and military unrest since the one nine seven nine eight zero 
soviet invasion and subsequent conflicts while severe drought added to the 
nation s difficulties in one nine nine eight two zero zero one about seven zero 
percent of the population is under three zero according to asian development 
bank the total fertility rate is six eight the highest in south asia with a 
regional average at three three but so are mortality rates infant mortality 
rate is one six six per one zero zero zero births the economically active 
population in two zero zero two was about one one million out of a total of an 
estimated two nine million while there are no official unemployment rate 
estimates available it is evident that it is high the number of non skilled 
young people is estimated at three million which is likely to increase by some 
three zero zero zero zero zero per annum fujimura two zero zero four a the 
country s natural resources include copper zinc and iron ore in central areas 
precious and semi precious stones such as lapis emerald and azure in the north 
east and east and unproved oil and gas reserves in the north however its 
significant mineral resources remain largely untapped because of the afghan war 
of the one nine eight zero s and subsequent fighting encyclopaedia britannica 
two zero zero five a good portion of afghanistan gdp comes from illicit drugs 
including opium its derivtives morphine and heroin and hashish afghanistan was 
once a world renowned producer of cotton here turkish president celal bayar and 
king zahir inspect the produce of khan nasher s spinzar cotton company in one 
nine six six on a positive note international efforts to rebuild afghanistan 
led to the formation of the afghan interim authority aia as a result of the 
december two zero zero one bonn agreement and later addressed at the tokyo 
donors conference for afghan reconstruction in january two zero zero two where 
four five billion was committed in a trust fund to be administered by the world 
bank group priority areas for reconstruction include the rebuilding of 
education system health and sanitation facilities enhancement of administrative 
capacity the development of the agricultural sector and the rebuilding of road 
energy and telecommunication links according to a two zero zero four report by 
the asian development bank the present reconstruction effort is two pronged 
first it focuses on rebuilding critical physical infrastructure and second on 
building modern public sector institutions from the remnants of soviet style 
planning to ones that promote market led development fujimura two zero zero 
four b but macroeconomic planning and management at present is hampered by poor 
information weak service delivery systems and less than adequate law 
enforcement the country has been going through economic recovery since the 
taliban were overthrown in october two zero zero one however estimating 
afghanistan s economy is problematic as it is impossible to gather reliable 
statistics while it is going through a significant change period in all fronts 
with the added problem of less than ideal security situation the best estimate 
that can be relied upon is that of the central statistical office in two zero 
zero three from which the cia factbook seems to have drawn some data 
accordingly the country s estimated gross domestic product gdp was two one five 
billion in two zero zero three a two eight six growth over two zero zero two 
cia factbook two zero zero three among the two three two listed countries in 
the cia factbook afghanistan ranks one zero eight th in terms of gdp which 
means per capita income of eight zero zero a brief comparison shows that 
afghanistan is the poorest country among its neighbors pakistan with a gdp of 
three four seven billion in two zero zero three had a per capita purchasing 
power of two two zero zero and iran with its five one seven billion had seven 
seven zero zero in the north turkmenistan had a gdp of two seven six billion 
and a per capita income of five seven zero zero uzbekistan with its four eight 
billion had one eight zero zero and tajikistan despite a low gdp of only eight 
billion had a per capita income of one one zero zero per head the world bank 
estimates that afghanistan will remain in need of external financial help 
before it can stand on its own feet economically ironically afghanistan s gdp 
ranks approximately at the same level as jordan two five five bn and qatar one 
nine five bn however considering that those oil rich arab states have smaller 
populations jordan per capita income amounts to four five zero zero and qatar s 
to two three two zero zero one of the main drivers for the current economic 
recovery is the return of over two million refugees from neighbouring countries 
and the west who brought with them fresh energy entrepreneurship and wealth 
creating skills as well as much needed capital to start up small businesses 
what is also helping is the estimated two three billion in international 
assistance the partial recovery of the agricultural sector and the 
reestablishment of market institutions while the country s current account 
deficit is largely financed with the donor money only a small portion about one 
five is provided directly to the government budget the rest is provided to non 
budgetary expenditure and donor designated projects through the un system and 
ngos it needs to be mentioned that there are some as yet unconfirmed claims 
that most of this money is spent on the expenses of the un and other non 
governmental organizations as well as being funneled into illegitimate 
activities the government had a central budget of only three five zero million 
in two zero zero three and an estimated five five zero million in two zero zero 
four the country s foreign exchange reserves totals about five zero zero 
million revenue is mostly generated through customs as income and corporate tax 
bases are negligible inflation had been a major problem until two zero zero two 
however the depreciation of the afghani in two zero zero two after the 
introduction of the new notes which replaced one zero zero zero old afghani by 
one new afghani coupled with the relative stability compared to previous 
periods has helped prices to stabilize and even decrease between december two 
zero zero two and february two zero zero three reflecting the turnaround 
appreciation of the new afghani currency since then the index has indicated 
stability with a moderate increase toward late two zero zero three fujimura two 
zero zero four c the afghan government and international donors seem to remain 
committed to improving access to basic necessities infrastructure development 
education housing and economic reform the central government is also focusing 
on improved revenue collection and public sector expenditure discipline the 
rebuilding of the financial sector seems to have been so far successful money 
can now be transferred in and out of the country via official banking channels 
and according to accepted international norms a new law on private investment 
provides three seven year tax holidays to eligible companies and a four year 
exemption from exports tariffs and duties while these improvements will help 
rebuild a strong basis for the nation in the future for now the majority of the 
population continues to suffer from insufficient food clothing housing medical 
care and other problems exacerbated by military operations and political 
uncertainties the government is not strong enough to collect customs duties 
from all the provinces due to the power of the warlords fraud is widespread and 
corruption is rife within all afghan government organs and central authority is 
barely felt in the lawless south and south west the economist two zero zero 
five expanding poppy cultivation and a growing opium trade is another huge 
problem for the country the cia estimates that one third of the country s gdp 
comes from opium export although the asian development bank states a lower 
figure namely two five billion one two of the gdp at any rate this is not only 
one of kabul s most serious policy and law enforcement challenges but also one 
of the world s most serious problems the problem began with the soviet invasion 
in one nine seven nine eight zero as the government began to lose control of 
provinces warlordism flourished and with it opium production as regional 
commanders searched for ways to generate money to purchase weapons according to 
the un at this time the west was pursuing an arms length supporting strategy of 
the afghan freedom fighters or mujahidin the main purpose being to cripple the 
ussr slowly into withdrawal rather than a quick and decisive overthrow when the 
west abandoned afghanistan after its perceived victory over the soviet union as 
the red army was forced to withdraw in one nine eight nine a power vacuum was 
created various mujahidin factions started fighting against each other for 
power with the discontinuation of western support they resorted ever more to 
poppy cultivation to finance their military existence the regional mafia who 
were looking for a safe operational hub joined forces with the more fanatic 
sections of the mujahidin supported by arab extremists like osama bin laden as 
well as the pakistani secret intelligence service isi to form the taliban 
movement towards the end of one nine nine four rashid two zero zero zero see 
also bbc report here the taliban having taken control of nine zero of the 
country actively encouraged poppy cultivation with this they not only fulfilled 
their promises and obligations to their partners the regional mafia but also 
increased their own desperately needed income through taxes according to the 
above un source afghanistan saw a bumper opium crop of four six zero zero 
million tonnes in one nine nine nine which was the height of the taliban rule 
in afghanistan when they came under extreme international diplomatic pressure 
in two zero zero two they initiated a ban on poppy cultivation following the us 
led coalition war that led to the defeat of the taliban in november two zero 
zero one which essentially collapsed the economy the relatively few other 
sources of revenue forced many of the country s farmers to resort back to 
growing cash crops for export a notable example of such a crop is the opium 
poppy one three zero zero km in two zero zero four according to the united 
nations office on drugs and crime the cultivation of which has largely 
increased during the last decade afghanistan has become the first illicit opium 
producer in the world before burma myanmar part of the so called golden 
triangle the main obstacle to eradicating poppy cultivation in afghanistan is 
the us forces need for the warlords and their forces in hunting terrorists the 
warlords are the major culprits in poppy cultivation but are also highly useful 
to the us forces in scouting providing local intelligence keeping their own 
territories clean from al qaeda and taliban insurgents and even taking part in 
military operations all for money this also contributes to the lack of central 
government s real authority in provinces and discourages farmers from growing 
grain and fruit as they did for centuries previously in short the afghan 
economy is currently december two zero zero five going through a hefty change 
period on the one hand there are encouraging signs of positive development and 
increasing wealth creation and management but on the other hand the security 
situation the lingering war against terrorism and the opium problem have 
created tall barriers for afghanistan to rejoin the international community in 
prosperity and economic development economy references fujimura manabu two zero 
zero four afghan economy after the election asian development bank institute 
cia factbook two zero zero three afghanistan section the economist magazine uk 
october two zero zero five un office for the coordination of human affairs 
website rashid ahmed two zero zero zero taliban militant islam oil and 
fundamentalism in central asia yale university press the bbc demographics main 
article demographics of afghanistan the population of afghanistan is divided 
into a wide variety of ethnic groups largely composed of iranian and turkic 
peoples because a systematic census has not been held in the country in decades 
exact figures about the size and composition of the various ethnic groups are 
not available therefore most figures are approximations only according to the 
cia world factbook updated on one seven may two zero zero five an approximate 
ethnic group distribution is as follows pashtun three zero tajik two nine 
hazara two two uzbek one one aimak five turkmen three baloch two other four 
including sikhs the cia factbook on languages in afghanistan refers to the 
official languages of afghanistan as being persian local name dari five zero 
and pashtu three five other languages include turkic languages primarily uzbek 
and turkmen one one three zero minor languages primarily balochi and pashai 
four bilingualism is common religiously afghans are overwhelmingly muslim 
approximately eight zero sunni and one nine shi a there are also small hindu 
and sikh minorities afghanistan was once home to a many centuries old jewish 
minority numbering approximately five zero zero zero in one nine four eight 
most jewish families fled the country after the one nine seven nine soviet 
invasion and only one individual remains today zablon simintov with the fall of 
the taliban a number of sikhs have returned to the ghazni nangarhar kandahar 
and kabul provinces of afghanistan constitution main article constitution of 
afghanistan according to the two zero zero four constitution afghanistan is run 
by a president who is elected by direct popular vote to a five year term the 
president may only serve two terms a candidate for president must be at least 
forty years of age a muslim and a citizen of afghanistan the country has two 
vice presidents the president serves as head of state and government and is 
commander in chief of the armed forces the president makes appointments for his 
cabinet as well as posts in the military police force and provincial 
governorships with the approval of parliament the legislative body of 
afghanistan is a parliament consisting of two houses the wolesi jirga house of 
the people and the meshrano jirga house of elders the wolesi jirga consists of 
up to two five zero members elected to five year terms through direct elections 
in proportion to the population of each province at least two women must be 
elected from each province in the meshrano jirga one third of the members are 
elected by provincial councils for four years one third are elected by district 
councils of each province for three years and one third are appointed by the 
president for five years of whom half must be women the judicial system of 
afghanistan consists of the stera mahkama supreme court appeals courts and 
lower district courts designated by law the stera mahkama is made up of nine 
judges appointed by the president with the approval of parliament to a ten year 
term judges must be at least forty years of age not belong to a political party 
and have a degree in law or islamic jurisprudence the stera mahkama can judge 
the constitutionality of all laws in the country culture main article culture 
of afghanistan afghans display pride in their country ancestry military prowess 
and above all their independence like other highlanders afghans are regarded 
with mingled apprehension and condescension for their high regard for personal 
honor for their clan loyalty and for their readiness to carry and use arms to 
settle disputes heathcote two zero zero three as clan warfare internecine 
feuding has been one of their chief occupations since time immemorial this 
individualistic trait has made it difficult for foreign invaders to hold the 
region afghanistan has a complex history that has survived either in its 
current cultures or in the form of various languages and monuments however many 
of the country s historic monuments have been damaged in recent wars the two 
famous statues of buddha in the bamiyan province were destroyed by the taliban 
who regarded them as idolatrous other famous sites include the very cities of 
herat ghazni and balkh the minaret of jam in the hari rud valley is a unesco 
world heritage site the people of afghanistan are prominent horsemen as the 
national sport is buzkashi afghan hounds a type of running dogs also originated 
in afghanistan although literacy levels are very low classic persian poetry 
plays a very important role in afghan culture poetry has always been one of the 
major educational pillars in both iran and afghanistan to the level that it has 
integrated itself into culture private poetry competition events known as musha 
era are quite common even among ordinary people almost every home owns one or 
more poetry collection of some sort even if it is not read often the afghan 
dialect of the persian language dari derives from farsi e darbari meaning 
persian of the royal courts it is regarded by some scholars as the more 
original version of the language iran having a larger population a stronger 
economy and closer ties to the rest of the world has developed its language 
further in the course of history afghanistan took a more conservative approach 
mainly due to lack of resources as a result dari has not changed much over the 
last few centuries many of the famous persian language poets of one zero th to 
one five th centuries stem from what is now known as afghanistan they were 
mostly also scholars in many disciplines like languages natural sciences 
medicine religion and astronomy examples are mawlvi balkhi rumi born and 
educated in the balkh province in the one three th century and moved to today s 
istanbul sanaayi ghaznavi one two th century native of ghazni provice jami 
heravi one five th century native of jam e herat in western afghanistan nizam 
ud din ali sher heravi nava i one five th century heart province also some of 
the contemporary persian language poets and writers who are relatively well 
know in both iran and afghanistan includes ustad behtab khalilullah khalili 
sufi ghulam nabi ashqari parwin pazwak and others in addition to poets the 
region of afghanistan produced numerous scientists as well including avicenna 
ibn sina balkhi who hailed from balkh avicenna who travelled to isfahan later 
in life to establish a medical school there is known by some scholars as the 
father of modern medicine george sarton called ibn sina the most famous 
scientist of islam and one of the most famous of all races places and times his 
most famous works are the book of healing and the canon of medicine also known 
as the qanun avicenna s story even found way to the contemporary english 
literature through noah gordon s the physician now published in many languages 
before the taliban gained power the city of kabul was home to many musicians 
who were masters of both traditional and modern afghan music especially during 
the nauroz celebration kabul in the middle part of the two zero th century has 
been likened to vienna during the one eight th and one nine th centuries the 
tribal system which orders the life of most people outside metropolitan areas 
is certainly as potent in political terms as the national state system of 
europe one nine one four men feel a fierce loyalty to their own tribe such that 
if called upon assemble in arms under the tribal chiefs and local clan leaders 
khans in the same way that men throughout europe flocked to the colours in one 
nine one four forming up in regional divisions and battalions under the command 
of the local nobility and gentry in theory under islamic law every believer has 
an obligation to bear arms at the ruler s call ulul amr but this was no more 
needed than was enforced conscription to fill the ranks of the british army in 
one nine one four the afghan shepherd or peasant went to war for much the same 
mixture of reasons as the more civilised european clerk or factory worker a 
desire for adventure a desire not to be left out or lose esteem in the eyes of 
his fellows a contempt for invading foreigners revenge against those that 
ruined his family life or threatened his faith perhaps even the chance of extra 
cash or enhanced personal prospects the tribal system is not something 
particularly backward or warlike it is simply the best way of organizing large 
groups of people in a country that is geographically difficult and in a society 
that has an uncomplicated lifestyle from a materialistic point of view 
heathcote two zero zero three reference heathcote tony one nine eight zero two 
zero zero three the afghan wars one eight three nine one nine one nine 
sellmount staplehurst see also radio kabul music of afghanistan islam in 
afghanistan education main article education in afghanistan in the spring of 
two zero zero three it was estimated that three zero of afghanistan s seven 
zero zero zero schools had been seriously damaged during more than two decades 
of soviet occupation and civil war only half of the schools were reported to 
have clean water while fewer than an estimated four zero had adequate 
sanitation education for boys was not a priority during the taliban regime and 
girls were banished from schools outright in regards to the poverty and 
violence of their surroundings a study in two zero zero two by the save the 
children aid group said afghan children were resilient and courageous the study 
credited the strong institutions of family and community up to four million 
afghan children possibly the largest number ever are believed to have enrolled 
for class for the school year beginning in march of two zero zero three 
education is available for both girls and boys literacy of the entire 
population is estimated at three six male literacy rate is five one and female 
literacy is two one the male literacy rate is higher because previous taliban 
laws prohibited the education of women higher education the american university 
of afghanistan another aspect of education that is rapidly changing in 
afghanistan is the face of higher education in two zero zero six the american 
university of afghanistan opens it s doors with support from usaid and other 
donors with the aim of providing a world class english language co educational 
learning environment in afghanistan the university will take students from 
afghanistan and the region see also afghan scout association communications in 
afghanistan foreign relations of afghanistan list of sovereign states military 
of afghanistan transportation in afghanistan stamps and postal history of 
afghanistan list of birds on stamps of afghanistan list of fish on stamps of 
afghanistan golden needle sewing school taliban treatment of women taliban list 
of leaders of afghanistan additional references ghobar mit gholam mohammad 
afghanistan in the cource of history one nine nine nine all prints inc 
griffiths john c one nine eight one afghanistan a history of conflict andr 
deutsch london updated edition two zero zero one andre deutsch ltd two zero 
zero two isbn zero two three three zero five zero five three one levi peter one 
nine seven two the light garden of the angel king journeys in afghanistan 
collins one nine seven two isbn zero zero zero two one one zero four two three 
bobbs merrill company one nine seven three indianapolis new york isbn zero six 
seven two five one two five two one moorcroft william and trebeck george one 
eight four one travels in the himalayan provinces of hindustan and the panjab 
in ladakh and kashmir in peshawar kabul kunduz and bokhara from one eight one 
nine to one eight two five vol ii reprint new delhi sagar publications one nine 
seven one oxford university press one nine seven nine isbn zero one nine five 
seven seven one nine nine zero rashid ahmed two zero zero zero taliban militant 
islam oil and fundamentalism in central asia yale university press toynbee 
arnold j one nine six one between oxus and jumna oxford university press london 
isbn b zero zero zero six dbr four four wood john one eight seven two a journey 
to the source of the river oxus new edition edited by his son with an essay on 
the geography of the valley of the oxus by henry yule john murray london gregg 
division mcgraw hill one nine seven one isbn zero five seven six zero three 
three two two seven heathcote t a the afghan wars one eight three nine one nine 
nine nine one nine eight zero two zero zero three spellmount staplehurst 
external links afghanistan directory large website on afghanistan culture news 
online dating service for afghans afganistan online news source afghanistan 
entertainment center afgha com news discussions and more about afghanistan 
daily reports from kabul in farsi afghan lord afghanistan service center with 
daily news afghanistan information management service provided by joint un 
projects bbc news country profile afghanistan cia world factbook afghanistan us 
state department afghanistan includes background notes country study one nine 
nine seven rebuilding usaid and nato open directory project afghanistan 
directory category yahoo afghanistan directory category two zero zero two un 
map of afghanistan pdf news service latest news about afghanistan discussion 
board return to afghanistan a series of short films by the washington post on 
the new afghanistan british royal college for defense studies analyses and 
proposes a war in august two zero zero one geopium geopolitics of illicit drugs 
in asia afghanistan and burma development gateway s afghanistan reconstruction 
portal afghanan dot net afghanistan portal sabawoon online afghanistan online 
informative links and glossary about afghanistan afghanistan portal on the 
indian analyst index of news analysis and opinion from many sources the jews of 
afghanistan akdn islam way online your religion and spirituality portal books 
written by the celebrated afghan scholar mawlana faizani american university of 
afghanistan afghanistan paper money afghanistan central asian countries 
landlocked countries middle eastern countries near eastern countries saarc 
members this article is about albania the country on the adriatic coast of the 
balkans for other historic uses see albania disambiguation albania albanian 
republika e shqip ris ipa is a mediterranean country in southeastern europe it 
is bordered by serbia and montenegro in the north the republic of macedonia in 
the east and greece in the south it has a coast on the adriatic sea in the west 
and a coast on the ionian sea in the southwest the country is an emerging 
democracy and is formally named the republic of albania history main articles 
illyria illyricum dalmatia history of albania the earlier inhabitants were 
probably part of the pre indo european populace that occupied the coastline of 
most parts of the mediterranean their physical remains are scarce though and 
concentrated on the coastal region soon these first inhabitants were overrun by 
the proto hellenic tribes that gradually occupied modern day greece southern 
parts of what is now the former yugoslav republic of macedonia and the south of 
present day albania this process was completed over the second millennium bc 
and did not really affect northern or central albania an area that at the time 
presented the image of a political vacuum in essence a historical paradox 
historians do not agree over the origin of the illyrians some of them maintain 
that the illyrians descended from the pre indo european pelasgians while most 
scholars place them in the later wave of indo european invasions their presence 
can be traced back to nine zero zero bc when their political structure was 
formulated in the seven th and six th centuries bc excellent metal craftsmen 
and fierce warriors the illyrians formed warlord based kingdoms that fought 
amongst themselves for most of their history only during the six th century did 
the illyrians venture significant raids against their immediate neighbours the 
kingdom of the molossians in southern albania the kingdom of macedon and the 
kingdom of paionia besides warfare the illyrians were also peaceful traders of 
agricultural products and metal works the illyrian culture was heavily 
influenced by the greek culture mainly the south illyrian tribes albania is 
also the site of several ancient greek colonies macedonian rule probably their 
most important success was the slaughter of perdiccas iii king of macedon 
unfortunately for the illyrians perdiccas was succeeded by philip ii father of 
alexander the great who effectively terminated the illyrian aggression 
effectively ending any dominant control by the illyrians in the region roman 
and byzantine rule after being conquered by the roman empire illyria was 
reorganized as a roman province illyricum later divided into the provinces of 
dalmatia and pannonia the lands comprising albania mostly being included in 
dalmatia later the byzantine empire governed the region it was also ruled by 
the bulgarian and serbian empire after centuries use of the name illyria to 
denote the region fell out of fashion ottoman rule in the middle ages the name 
albania see origin and history of the name albania began to be increasingly 
applied to the region now comprising the nation of albania from one four four 
three to one four six eight gjergj kastrioti skenderbeu led a successful 
resistance against the invading ottomans after the death of skenderbeg 
resistance continued until one four seven eight although with only moderate 
success the loyalties and alliances created and nurtured by skenderbeg faltered 
and fell apart and the ottomans conquered the territory of albania shortly 
after the fall of the castle kruje albania then became part of the ottoman 
empire following this many albanians fled to neighboring italy and the majority 
of the albanian population that remained converted to islam they would remain a 
part of the ottoman empire until one nine one two effects of the balkan wars 
after the second balkan war the ottomans were removed from albania and there 
was a possibility of the lands being absorbed by serbia and the southern tip by 
greece this decision angered the italians who did not want serbia to have an 
extended coastline and it angered the germans who could build a railway to 
reach the orient berlin then held discussions with russia the superpower in 
charge of serbia and with greece eventually it was decided that the country 
should not be divided but instead consolidated into the principality of albania 
under a german prince william of wied when the german prince was expelled by 
the albanian people after six months as the self named king of albania great 
britain france and italy as members the league of nations wanted to divide the 
territory once and for all intervention by united states of america president 
woodrow wilson vetoed the vote and allowed albania to retain its status from 
one nine two eight the country was ruled by king zog i until one nine three 
eight when it became a puppet of italy world war ii and enver hoxha rule 
albanian communists and nationalists actively fought a partisan war against the 
italian and german invasions in ww ii certain smaller organizations helped the 
foreign invaders but it was the communists who took over after world war ii in 
november one nine four four the communists gained control of the government 
under the leader of the resistance enver hoxha from one nine four five until 
one nine nine zero albania had one of the most repressive governments in europe 
the communist party was created in one nine four one with the help of bolshevik 
communist parties all those who opposed it were eliminated for the many decades 
under his domination hoxha created and destroyed relationships with belgrade 
moscow and china always in his personal interests the country was isolated 
first from the west western europe north america and australasia and later even 
from the communist east the fall of communism and democratic albania in one 
nine eight five enver hoxha died and ramiz alia took his place initially alia 
tried to follow in hoxha s footsteps but in eastern europe changes had already 
started mikhail gorbachev had appeared in the soviet union with new policies 
glasnost and perestroika the albanian totalitarian regime was under pressure 
from the us europe and the anger and despair of its own people after nicolae 
ceau escu the communist leader of romania was executed in a revolution alia 
knew he would be next if changes were not made he signed the helsinki agreement 
which was signed by other countries in one nine seven five that respected some 
human rights he also allowed pluralism and even though his party won the 
election of one nine nine one it was clear that the change would not be stopped 
in one nine nine two the general elections were won by the democratic party 
with six two of the votes in the general elections of june one nine nine six 
the democratic party tried to win an absolute majority and manipulated the 
results in one nine nine seven an epidemic of pyramid schemes sent shockwaves 
through the entire country s economy and riots started police stations and 
military bases were looted of millions of weaponry kalashnikovs anarchy 
prevailed and many cities were controlled by militia and less organized armed 
citizens even us military advisors left the country for their own safety in 
response to the anarchy the socialist party won the early elections of one nine 
nine seven however stability was far from being restored in the years after the 
one nine nine seven riots the power feuds raging inside the socialist party led 
to a series of short lived socialist governments the country was flooded with 
refugees from neighboring kosovo in one nine nine eight and one nine nine nine 
in june two zero zero two a compromise candidate alfred moisiu a former general 
and defense minister was elected to succeed president meidani parliamentary 
elections in july two zero zero five brought back to power sali berisha leader 
of the democratic party mostly owing to socialist infighting and a series of 
corruption scandals plaguing the nano government since one nine nine zero 
albania has been diplomatically oriented towards the west it was accepted to 
the council of europe and has requested membership of nato the work force of 
albania has continued to emigrate to greece italy europe and north america 
corruption in the government is becoming more and more obvious any hope for a 
short and not too painful transition after communism has long since been dashed 
politics main article politics of albania the head of state is the president 
who is elected by the kuvendi or the assembly of the republic of albania every 
five years the main part of the assembly s one four zero members is elected 
every four years one zero zero of the parliament s members are chosen by the 
people with a direct vote while the other four zero members are chosen using a 
proportional system the head of government is the prime minister who is 
assisted by a council of ministers the council of ministers is selected by the 
prime minister a process called forming the government and then approved by a 
simple majority seven one votes in the assembly administrative divisions main 
articles districts of albania and counties of albania albania is divided into 
one two qark county or prefecture which are further divided into three six 
rrethe districts the capital city tiran has a special status the districts are 
see also list of cities in albania note some cities have the same name as the 
district they are in geography main article geography of albania map of albania 
albania consists of mostly hilly and mountainous terrain the highest mountain 
korab in the district of dibra reaching up to two seven five three metres nine 
zero three two ft the country mostly has a continental climate with cold 
winters and hot summers besides capital city tirana with eight zero zero zero 
zero zero inhabitants the principal cities are durr s elbasan shkod r gjirokast 
r vlor and kor in albanian grammar a word can have indefinite and definite 
forms and this also applies to city names so both tiran and tirana shkod r and 
shkodra are used economy main article economy of albania in albania half of the 
economically active population still engaged in agriculture and a fifth works 
abroad the country has almost no exports and imports most if its goods from 
greece and italy money for imports comes from financial aid and from the money 
that immigrants working abroad mostly in neighbouring greece bring to albania 
this is a good status quo business for both greece and italy albania s 
coastline on the ionian sea near the greek tourist island of corfu is becoming 
increasingly popular with foreign visitors due to its relatively unspoilt 
nature and good beaches however the tourist industry is still in its infancy 
growth was strong two zero zero three zero five and inflation is not a problem 
gdp purchasing power parity one eight zero five billion note albania has a 
large gray economy that may be as large as five zero of official gdp two zero 
zero five est gdp official exchange rate eight seven four one billion two zero 
zero five est gdp real growth rate six two zero zero five est gdp composition 
by sector agriculture two three six industry two zero five services five five 
nine two zero zero five est exports seven zero eight million f o b two zero 
zero five est imports two four seven three billion f o b two zero zero five est 
aid per capita five two us external debt one four one billion two zero zero 
three est defence expenditure n a children in labour force one of children aged 
one zero one four work demographics main article demographics of albania most 
of the population is ethnically albanian nine five according to the cia world 
factbook feb two zero zero five there is a greek minority three of the 
population this however could significally vary according to other sources note 
in one nine eight nine other estimates of the greek population ranged from one 
official albanian statistics to one two from a greek organization many ethnic 
albanians also live in the bordering countries of serbia and montenegro around 
one eight five zero zero zero zero of that around one eight zero zero zero zero 
zero in serbia around one seven zero zero zero zero zero in its province called 
kosovo officially kosovo and metohia only and around five zero zero zero zero 
in montenegro and the republic of macedonia around five zero zero zero zero 
zero although a lot of albanians believe that the number might be higher also a 
small number of ethnic albanians live in greece which are called am claims over 
am numbers have ranged from nine zero zero zero zero to over one one zero zero 
zero zero zero zero but are believed to be understated because athens has not 
considered the local albanians to be a separate ethnic group since one nine 
nine one large numbers of albanians have emigrated both legally and illegally 
to greece and italy the language is albanian although greek is also spoken by 
the greek minority in the southern regions of the country at the height of the 
ottoman occupation the majority of albanians were mostly muslim seven zero even 
though religion was prohibited during the communist era the albanian government 
proclaimed albania the only officially atheistic country in the world after the 
fall of the communist regime in one nine eight nine one nine nine zero 
religions were reinstated according to one nine three nine statistics the 
albanian orthodox two zero and roman catholic church one zero would be the 
other main religions in albania religious fanaticism has never been a serious 
problem with people from different religions living in peace and even getting 
married although this was not considered to be an optimal solution two zero of 
the total muslim population is bektashi people who follow a faith originating 
in the turkish migrations into turkey and came to albania through the ottoman 
janissaries it has outwardly shi ite islamic elements but is really a shamanic 
pantheistic faith culture main article culture of albania albanian literature 
cuisine of albania music of albania sport in albania radio televizioni shqiptar 
top channel tv miscellaneous topics list of albania related articles list of 
albanians islam in albania albanian mythology beslidhja skaut albania list of 
sovereign states communications in albania education in albania foreign 
relations of albania military of albania transportation in albania public 
holidays in albania list of albanian americans albanians in italy butrint 
national park the jewish community of albania albanian actors external links 
news and fun from albania albanian language list of abanian flags throughout 
history albania and the balkans discussion forum albanian etymological 
dictionary cia the world factbook albania cia s factbook on albania general 
information on albanians more links of the albanian government albania pictures 
an albanian news portal in albanian opic guide on albania travel guide to 
albania guide to gjirokaster map of albania www vl history albania official 
government websites albanian canadian league information service aclis albanian 
and english tanportal albanian social economic albanian albanian canadian 
league acl albanian and english department of information albanian and english 
the albanian parliament albanian english and french presidency of albania 
albanian and english albanian institute of statistics albanian and english 
albania for a king of anglo saxon england see aella of deira or aelle ii of 
northumbria or aelle of sussex men s names allah ed din and similar are 
misspellings for ala ud din and see here for other sorts of error the word is 
the arabic term for god in other languages it is often used to refer 
specifically to the islamic concept of god see usage below etymology usage 
although outside the arab world use of the word all h is most often associated 
with islam it is not exclusive to that faith arab christians and various arabic 
speaking jews including the teimanim several communities and some sephardim 
also use it to refer to the monotheist deity arabic translations of the bible 
also employ it as do roman catholics in malta who pronounce it as alla 
christians in indonesia who say allah bapa god the father and christians in the 
middle east who use the aramaic all ha allah as a word many linguists believe 
that the term all h is derived from a contraction of the arabic words al the 
and il h deity masculine form al il h meaning the god in addition one of the 
main pagan goddesses of pre islamic arabia all t al il h at or the goddess is 
cited as being etymologically though not synchronically the feminine linguistic 
counterpart to the grammatically masculine all h if so the word all h is an 
abbreviated title meaning the deity rather than a name for this reason both 
muslim and non muslim scholars often translate all h directly into english as 
god this also explains why arabic speaking jews and christians freely refer to 
god as all h however some muslim scholars feel that all h should not be 
translated because they perceived the arabic word to express the uniqueness of 
all h more accurately than the word god which can take a plural gods whereas 
the word all h has no plural form this is a significant issue in translation of 
the qur an all h written in simple arabic calligraphy the word all h is always 
written without an alif to spell the vowel this is because the spelling was 
settled before arabic spelling started habitually using alif to spell however 
in vocalized spelling a diacritic alif is added on top of the shaddah to 
indicate pronunciation one exception is in the pre islamic zabad inscription 
where it is spelled unicode has glyph reserved for allah u fdf two which can be 
combined with an alif to yield the post consonantal form as opposed to the full 
spelling alif l m l m h which may be rendered slightly differently in 
particular featuring a diacritic alif on top of the shadda in this unicode 
imitates traditional arabic typesetting which also frequently featured special 
ll h types also in abjad numerals the name of allah numeric value is six six 
islamic use of all h from the point of view of traditional islamic theology all 
h is the most precious name of god because it is not a descriptive name like 
other ninety nine names of god but the name of god s own presence muslims 
believe that the name of allah had existed before the time of adam it is the 
same god worshipped by adam noah abraham moses jesus muhammad and other 
prophets of islam in islam there is only one god and muhammad is the last 
messenger the emphasis in islamic culture on reciting the qur an in arabic has 
resulted in all h often being used by muslims world wide as the word for god 
regardless of their native language out of one one four suras in the qur an one 
one three begin with the basmala bismi ll hi r rahm ni r rah m which means in 
the name of god the most kind the most merciful muslims when referring to the 
name often add the words subhanahu wa ta ala after it meaning glorified and 
exalted is he as a sign of reverence or azza wa jalla the entire religion of 
islam is based on the idea of getting closer to god although commonly referred 
to as a he god is considered genderless but there is no neuter gender to 
express this in the arabic language when greek or other polytheistic deities 
are discussed in arabic it is customary to use the expression il h a deity or 
lower case god sometimes the word ma b d literally meaning worshipped entity is 
used instead uses of all h in phrases there are many phrases that contain the 
word all h all hu akbar god is the greatest a uzu billahi minashaitanir rajim i 
seek refuge in allah from shaitan the damned bismi ll h in the name of god insh 
all h god willing also the origin of the common spanish interjection ojal which 
shares a similar meaning probably also the origin of the portuguese 
interjection oxal let s hope for it or let s hope that y all h oh god may be 
the origin of the spanish and portuguese exclamation ol m sh all h look at what 
god has willed subh n all h glory be to god al hamdu li ll h all praise be to 
god all hu a alam god knows best jazaka all hu khayran may god reward you for 
your deeds all h appears in a stylized form on the flag of iran in the phrase 
all hu akbar on the flag of iraq and as part of the shah dah on the flag of 
saudi arabia allah is not correctly used as a man s name see arabic name 
mistakes made by europeans and other non arabs islamic concept of god the 
islamic concept of mankind s place in the universe hinges on the notion that 
all h or god is the only true reality there is nothing permanent other than him 
god is considered eternal and uncreated whereas everything else in the universe 
is created the qur an describes him in sura one one two say he is all h 
singular all h the absolute he begetteth not nor was begotten and to him have 
never been one equal see tawhid for more the qur an condemns and mocks the pre 
islamic arabs for attributing daughters to all h sura five three one nine 
muslims believe that all h or god is the only true god who deserves to be 
worshipped this belief must be accompanied by the acknowledgement that mohammad 
was a true prophet of god who was chosen to guide people to believing and 
worshipping god in the correct manner god is considered eternal and uncreated 
with no beginning whereas everything else in the universe is created with a 
beginning the qur an mentions approximated in english sura one one two say he 
is all h without partner all h the absolute he begetteth not nor was begotten 
and to him have never been one equal see tawhid for more god is considered by 
muslims to be omnipotent omnipresent and omniscient in the qur an god is 
described as being fully aware of everything that happens in the universe and 
knows all things god also knows what is in people s hearts and minds at all 
times it is mentioned in the qur an approximately and he it is who takes your 
souls at night in sleep and he knows what you acquire in the day then he raises 
you up therein that an appointed term may be fulfilled then to him is your 
return then he will inform you of what you were doing sura six six zero placing 
god inside his creation or suggesting that nature or creation simultaneously co 
exist in god or vice versa as in other religious traditions completely 
compromises exclusive islamic monotheism attributing a partner spouse father 
son daughter mother or other relation s to allah literally or metaphorically 
partially or completely is considered unquestionably blasphemous by muslims 
therefore muslims consider it blasphemous to describe jesus or another man 
woman child etc as son of god whether literally or metaphorically similarly 
muslims do not believe that god resembles a man old or young woman half man 
half woman half man half animal bird elephant or other animal or other creation 
it is forbidden for muslims to view god anthropomorphically allah does not 
resemble any of his creations in any way whatsoever allah is not attributed 
with shape colour size position location direction and indeed all of these 
attributes are found in the creatures allah created further muslims do not 
believe that allah is located in a place whether on earth below the earth in 
the sky above the sky on a throne above the sky or all of these places at once 
or anywhere else or everywhere but rather god exists without a place given he 
created all places and locations and the perfectness of his existence is not 
compromised by his existence not being bound to a created by allah place or 
location god is attributed with complete perfection in his attributes and is 
free from any defects or any imperfections allah is attributed amongst other 
attributes with oneness without a partner in god s self or attributes non 
beginningness eternalness complete freedom from needing others i e each or any 
of his creations complete power to do all things will to do as he wills as and 
when god decides without any obstruction knowledge of all things simultaneously 
past present and future hearing of all sounds without needing any implement or 
organ to hear sight without needing eyes or any other organ or instrument nor 
light rays to illuminate an area or an object life unlike the human or other 
life which is created and limited but that which befits him with no beginning 
or end speech unlike the human created speech which is constituted of languages 
letters and sounds but rather an eternal speech which is not a creation but an 
attribute of god and the complete non resemblence of any creation in his self 
or attributes history it was used in pre islamic times by pagans within the 
arabian peninsula to signify the supreme creator pre islamic jews referred to 
their supreme creator as yahweh or elohim the pagan arabs recognized all h as 
the supreme god in their pantheon along with allah however the pre islamic 
arabs believed in a host of other gods such as hubal and daughters of all h the 
three daughters associated were al l t al uzzah and manah encyclopedia of world 
mythology and legend the facts on file ed anthony mercatante new york one nine 
eight three i six one this view of allah by the pre islamic pagans is viewed by 
muslims as a latter development having arisen as a result of moving away from 
abrahamic monotheism over time some of the names of these pagan gods are said 
to be derived from the descendants of noah whom latter generations firstly 
revered as saints and then transformed into gods although non muslims often 
view polytheism as having come before monotheism the pagan arabians also used 
the word all h in the names of their children muhammad s father who was born 
into pagan society was named abdull h which translates servant of all h abdull 
h is still used for names of muslim and non muslim arabs the hebrew word for 
deity el or el ah was used as an old testament synonym for yahweh which is the 
proper name for the jewish god according to the tanakh the aramaic word for god 
is al h syriac dialect or el h biblical dialect which comes from the same proto 
semitic word il h as the arabic and hebrew terms jesus is described in mark one 
five three four as having used the word on the cross with the ending meaning my 
when saying my god my god why hast thou forsaken me transliterated in greek as 
el i one of the earliest surviving translations of the word into a foreign 
language is in a greek translation of the shahada from eight six nine six ah 
seven zero five seven one five ad which translates it as ho theos monos 
literally the one god also the cognate aramaic term appears in the aramaic 
