sections one one one one three one one three two one four two one five one one 
five two and one six one taggart building a skyscraper in new york the 
headquarters of taggart transcontinental and the location of the taggart 
terminal taggart comet the taggart comet is taggart transcontinental s flagship 
train it runs from new york to san francisco and has never been late the 
taggart comet appears in sections one one two one one three and one five two 
the future see bertram scudder the heart is a milkman the heart is a milkman is 
a novel being written by balph eubank it is about the central fact of human 
existence frustration eubank says he will dedicate it to lillian rearden it is 
mentioned in section one six one the octopus see bertram scudder the vulture is 
molting a best selling novel that captures the spirit of the times the vulture 
is molting is a penetrating study of a businessman s greed a fearless 
revelation of man s depravity the book is mentioned in section one four one as 
one of the artifacts of popular culture that depresses dagny taggart with its 
baseness wayne falkland hotel a luxurious hotel in new york it is considered 
the best hotel left in the world it is where francisco d anconia stays when he 
is in town it was also the scene of dagny taggart s debut ball when she was 
seventeen it may be based on the waldorf astoria hotel in new york city the 
wayne falkland hotel is mentioned in sections one four one one five one and one 
five two wyatt oil fields the wyatt oil fields are in colorado they are a bunch 
of old abandoned oil wells that were revived by a new technique invented by 
ellis wyatt this has almost single handedly revitalized the economy of colorado 
the wyatt oil fields appear in sections one one one and one six one atlas 
shrugged lists of fictional things atlas as told in atlas shrugged atlas 
carried the world on his shoulders but in the greek myths the titan atlas 
stands on the earth and holds up the sky in the statues that represent atlas 
the big round thing on his back represents the heavens which because of the 
apparent circular motion of the planets around the earth were conceived of as 
being round some tellings of the atlas myth have him carrying both the earth 
and the heavens on his back but this appears to be a modern retelling further 
research might confirm this character names some of the character names are or 
appear to be puns or have some other significance see also characters in atlas 
shrugged when asked why so many of her names have syllables with many hard 
consonants like dag tag den stad rand said that she just liked those sounds 
ragnar danneskjold sounds like dane s gold a tribute paid by the medieval 
english to the vikings to bribe them into being peaceful however note skjold 
means shield not gold however the hero of victor hugo s first novel hans of 
iceland becomes the first of the counts of danneskj ld in the one nine seven 
zero s rand told marsha familaro enright that her use of this name was not 
plagiarism because there really were counts of danneskj ld robert stadler 
sounds like the german word for state staat dr stadler is a statist in that he 
believes it appropriate and necessary for the state to fund scientific research 
francisco d anconia rand s husband was frank o connor john galt the name of a 
one nine th century scottish novelist though this is apparently coincidental 
galt is close to geld and gold the name was probably used because it had to be 
such that it could become proverbial this would not be possible with a long 
awkward name wesley mouch mouch is exactly what his name sounds like a mooch he 
has no real virtue or skill but somehow becomes a powerful figure crime common 
street crime is conspicuously absent in atlas shrugged characters walk the 
streets with no thought of being mugged or attacked historical figures and 
events atlas shrugged takes place in a world with a different history from our 
own but there are some historical figures and events that are mentioned 
aristotle section one five two francisco d anconia wrote a thesis on the 
influence of aristotle s theory of the immovable mover dark ages section one 
six one ragnar danneskjold s piracy is likened to something out of the dark 
ages inquisition section one five two sebastian d anconia flees spain to escape 
persecution under the inquisition middle ages section one six one it is said 
that ragnar danneskjold hides in the norwegian fjords as the vikings did in the 
middle ages nero section one five two francisco d anconia compares himself to 
the emperor nero patrick henry section one five two the eponym of patrick henry 
university vikings section one six one it is said that ragnar danneskjold hides 
in the norwegian fjords as the vikings did in the middle ages humor in section 
one five two francisco cracks that the mexican government was promising a roast 
of pork every sunday for every man woman child and abortion in section one five 
two francisco lists the various buildings constructed for the workers of the 
san sebastian mines and notes how they are all poorly built and can be expected 
to collapse except for the church the church i think will stand they ll need it 
he quips since the other things are things of value houses roads etc it is 
ironic that only the church was built to last to rand and her heroes a church 
is of no real value almost every nation in the world except the united states 
is referred to as the people s state of and they are all apparently the 
recipients of relief supplies from the united states in conversation people 
casually refer to them as the people s state of rather than just say france or 
norway it is obvious that people would not refer to countries by their formal 
names in casual conversation we don t call canada the dominion of canada or 
germany the federal republic of germany so by having her characters do this 
rand is exercising her dry wit lying the sympathetic characters of atlas 
shrugged generally do not tell lies with the following exceptions even when 
they are clearly trying to conceal something they do not rely on overt 
falsehood even when it is obvious that they could do so without being found out 
in section one one two brakeman tells dagny taggart he does not recall the name 
of the song he was whistling or where he heard it in section one four one 
francisco d anconia tells the press he came to new york because of a hat check 
girl and the liverwurst at moe s delicatessen in section one five one we learn 
dagny taggart once lied to her mother about a cut to her lip that francisco had 
given her this was the only lie she ever told in section one five two dagny 
taggart asks francisco if richard halley has written a fifth concerto he is 
evasive and tells her that halley has stopped writing is this a lie in section 
one six one hank rearden tells dagny that he was the one who invited bertram 
scudder to the rearden s anniversary party it was actually lillian who invited 
him and rearden had been furious about it in part two chapter nine eddie 
willers tells dagny taggart that his hesitation and uncertainty is caused by 
the illegality of her directions in fact eddie was shocked by the evidence and 
thus realization of her affair with hank rearden people s states almost every 
nation that is mentioned other than the united states is referred to as a 
people s state these include the people s state of england the people s state 
of france the people s state of india the people s state of mexico the people s 
state of norway the people s state of portugal the people s state of turkey the 
leaders of these countries are given the title the head of the people s state 
and called mr or senor the president of the united states is refered to as mr 
thompson and called the head of the state which seems to imply the us is on its 
way to becoming a people s state as well religion in section one five two 
francisco tells dagny he named the san sebastian mines after his ancestor 
sebastian d anconia a man they both honor deeply this to dagny is blasphemy the 
only kind of blasphemy she understands social classes rand is sometimes called 
an elitist this claim is probably accurate if we allow for the fact that rand 
had her own standard of eliteness throughout atlas shrugged virtue is equated 
with creative ability it is however worth noting that in atlas shrugged there 
are no characters with creative ability which do not function as author 
surrogate characters most notably dagny taggart conversely all of the 
characters which disagree with the author are unintelligent and creatively 
bankrupt and usually actively destructive compare to the real world where 
scientists inventors artists and industrialists often have wildly varying and 
strongly conflicting desires and opinions different social classes are 
represented among both the heroes and the villains of atlas shrugged among the 
heroes john galt and hank rearden are from working class backgrounds while 
dagny taggart and francisco d anconia are from wealthy families among the 
villains fred kinnan is from a working class background while james taggart and 
betty pope are from wealthy families atlas shrugged atlas shrugged cover by 
nick gaetano atlas shrugged is a novel by russian born writer and philosopher 
ayn rand first published in one nine five seven in the usa and rand s last work 
of fiction before concentrating her writings exclusively on philosophy most 
regard atlas shrugged as rand s most famous work her tour de force and most 
objectivists hold it to be objectively as in factually the greatest novel of 
all time its theme as stated by rand is the importance of the individual s 
reasoning mind in human life it is a highly philosophical and allegorical story 
that deals with themes of rand s own objectivism though she was not yet known 
as a philosopher when it was written whether or not she had philosophical 
intentions and to what extent or sense the novel is an allegory are 
controversial subjects in fact the ideas behind the book and their extremism as 
well as its relative popularity have made it one of the most controversial 
novels of the two zero th century it is also one of the longest novels ever 
written totaling one thousand pages or more depending on the publication 
philosophy and writing the theme of atlas shrugged is that independent rational 
thought is the motor that powers the world in the book men of the mind go on 
strike allowing the collapse of what only they hold together a peaceful 
cohesiveness rand claims that humans particularly those whose productive work 
comes from mental effort may create wherever forceful human interference is 
absent given no alternative they remove themselves from the looters the title 
is an analogy the rational men like the greek god atlas hold the world on their 
shoulders in the form of a strike they have chosen to shrug the book is rooted 
in objectivism the philosophical system founded by rand rand suggests that 
society stagnates when independence and individual achievement are discouraged 
or demonized and that inversely a society will become more prosperous as it 
allows encourages and rewards independence and individual achievement rand 
believed that independence flourishes to the extent that people are free and 
that achievement is rewarded best when private property is respected strictly 
she advocated laissez faire capitalism as the political system that is most 
consistent with these beliefs these considerations make atlas shrugged a highly 
political book especially in its portrayal of fascism socialism and communism 
or indeed any form of state intervention in societal affairs as fatally flawed 
however rand claimed that it is not a fundamentally political book but that the 
politics portrayed in the novel are a result of her attempt to display her 
image of the ideal man and the position of the human mind in society rand 
argues that independence and individual achievement drive the world and should 
be embraced her worldview requires a rational moral code she disputes the 
notion that self sacrifice is a virtue and is similarly dismissive of human 
faith in a god or higher being the book positions itself against christianity 
specifically often directly within the characters dialogue setting exactly when 
atlas shrugged is meant to take place is kept deliberately vague in section one 
five two the population of new york city is given as seven million the 
historical new york city reached seven million people in the one nine three 
zero s which might place the novel sometime after that there are many early two 
zero th century technologies available but the political situation is clearly 
different from actual history one interpretation is that the novel takes place 
a hundred or perhaps hundreds of years in the future implying that since the 
world lapsed into its socialistic morass a global wide stagnation has occurred 
in technological growth population growth and indeed growth of any kind the 
wars economic depressions and other events of the two zero th century would be 
a distant memory to all but scholars and academicians this would be in line 
with rand s ideas and commentary on other novels depicting utopian and 
dystopian societies furthermore this is also in line with an excerpt from a one 
nine six four interview with playboy magazine in which rand states what we have 
today is not a capitalist society but a mixed economy that is a mixture of 
freedom and controls which by the presently dominant trend is moving toward 
dictatorship the action in atlas shrugged takes place at a time when society 
has reached the stage of dictatorship when and if this happens that will be the 
time to go on strike but not until then thus implying that her novel takes 
place at some point in the future the concept of societal stagnation in the 
wake of collectivist systems is central to the plot of another of rand s works 
anthem all countries outside the us have become or become during the novel 
people s states there are many examples of early two zero th century technology 
in atlas shrugged but no post war advances such as nuclear weapons helicopters 
or computers jet planes are mentioned briefly as being a relatively new 
technology television is a novelty that has yet to assume any cultural 
significance while radio broadcasts are prominent though rand does not use in 
the book many of the technological innovations available while she was writing 
she introduces some advanced fictional inventions e g sound based weapons of 
mass destruction torture devices as well as power plants most of the action in 
atlas shrugged occurs in the united states however there are important events 
around the world such as in the people s states of mexico chile and argentina 
and piracy at sea plot a section by section analysis of atlas shrugged is 
available on wikibooks the novel s plot split into three sections though the 
story is coherent apart from these is extremely complex the first two sections 
and to some extent the last follow dagny taggart a no nonsense railroad 
executive and her attempt to keep the company alive despite the fact that 
society is falling towards collectivism altruism statism all throughout the 
novel people repeat a platitude dagny greatly resents who is john galt it is a 
reflection of their helplessness as the saying means don t ask important 
questions because they don t have answers the geniuses of the world seem to be 
disappearing and the apparent decline of civilization is making it more and 
more difficult for her to sustain her life long aspirations of running the 
trans continental railroad which has been in her family for several generations 
she deals with other characters such as hank rearden a self made businessman of 
great integrity whose career is hindered by his false feelings of obligation 
towards his wife francisco d anconia dagny s childhood friend first love and 
king of the copper industry appears to have become a worthless playboy who is 
purposely destroying his business as the novel progresses the myths about the 
real john galt as well as francisco d anconia s actions become more and more a 
reflection of the state of the culture and seem to make more and more sense and 
hank and dagny begin to experience the futility of their attempts to survive in 
a society that hates them and those like them for their greatness during their 
plight dagny and hank find the remnants of a motor that turns atmospheric 
energy into kinetic energy an astounding feat they also find evidence that the 
minds the atlases of the world are disappearing because of one particular 
destroyer taking them away dagny and hank deal with the irrationalities and 
apparent contradictions of their atmosphere and search for the creator of the 
motor as well as the destroyer who is draining the world of its prime movers in 
an effort to secure their ability to live rational lives all of this leads to 
an elaborate action based explanation and eventual climax presenting an 
understanding of all of the issues explored and breaking everything down into 
one basic conflict the final parts of the novel involve a speech by the story s 
true protagonist and a resolution concerning the fate of society the question 
who is john galt is also answered characters minor characters companies 
concepts places technology things topics of note film adaptation rights to the 
novel atlas shrugged were purchased by the baldwin entertainment group in two 
zero zero three with the intent of producing a feature length film company 
leader howard baldwin was quoted in september two zero zero four as saying 
everything is on track and the movie hasn t been held up one bit i assure you 
that this will be a big movie and it will get made two works of rand s the 
fountainhead and we the living have been adapted into movies so far external 
links http www aynrand org http www atlassociety org news atlas movie updated 
zero five zero three zero four asp http www cordair com gaetano index htm 
references and further reading publications atlas shrugged ayn rand signet 
september one nine nine six isbn zero four five one one nine one one four five 
atlas shrugged cliffs notes andrew bernstein cliffs notes june five two zero 
zero zero isbn zero seven six four five eight five five six eight the world of 
atlas shrugged robert bidinotto the objectivist center highbridge company april 
one nine two zero zero one isbn one five six five one one four seven one x 
atlas shrugged manifesto of the mind twayne s masterwork studies no one seven 
four mimi reisel gladstein twayne pub june two zero zero zero isbn zero eight 
zero five seven one six three eight six the moral revolution in atlas shrugged 
nathaniel branden the objectivist center july one nine nine nine isbn one five 
seven seven two four zero three three two odysseus jesus and dagny susan 
mccloskey the objectivist center august one one nine nine eight isbn one five 
seven seven two four zero two five one foreign translations german wer ist john 
galt hamburg germany gewis verlag isbn three nine three two five six four zero 
three zero italian la rivolta di atlante two vol milano garzanti one nine five 
eight out of print translator laura grimaldi japanese isbn four eight two eight 
four one one four nine six translator norwegian de som beveger verden kagge 
forlag two zero zero zero isbn eight two four eight nine zero zero eight three 
five hardcover isbn eight two four eight nine zero one six nine six paperback 
translator john erik b e lindgren polish atlas zbuntowany zysk i s ka two zero 
zero four isbn eight three seven one five zero nine six nine three twarda 
translator iwona micha owska spanish la rebelion de atlas editorial grito 
sagrado isbn nine eight seven two zero nine five one zero eight hardcover isbn 
nine eight seven two zero nine five one one six paperback swedish och v rlden 
sk lvde timbro f rlag two zero zero five isbn nine one seven five six six five 
five six five translator maud freccero turkish atlas vazge ti plato yay nlar 
two zero zero three isbn nine seven five nine six seven seven two six one 
translator belk s orap reviews review from a self proclaimed non libertarian 
review from the weird bookshelf fine science fiction books slade robert m 
review from the internet review project one nine nine eight a review which 
while attempting to address the environmentalist issues claims that atlas 
shrugged is a sequel to the lord of the rings a review and in depth chapter by 
chapter motif by motif etc analysis satires and parodies telemachus sneezed 
within robert anton wilson s illuminatus trilogy search for taffy rhinestone in 
the former link to read the spoof the abridged atlas shrugged a thousand pages 
distilled into about a thousand words atlas shr a look at parallel universes 
wherein all of ayn rand s books are four hundred pages shorter elvis shrugged 
an early nine zero s comic book miniseries published by revolutionary comics in 
which popular entertainers elvis presley a cyborg frank sinatra frank zappa 
madonna spike lee and others take the place of various atlas shrugged 
counterparts oscar shrugged a depiction of the first film festival held in galt 
s gulch atlas shrugged two one hour later starring bob the angry flower one 
nine five seven books atlas shrugged novels philosophical novels books critical 
of christianity books by ayn rand anthropology from the greek word human or 
person consists of the study of humanity see genus homo it is holistic in two 
senses it is concerned with all humans at all times and with all dimensions of 
humanity a primary trait that traditionally distinguished anthropology from 
other humanistic disciplines is an emphasis on cultural relativity indepth 
examination of context and cross cultural comparisons in north america 
anthropology is traditionally divided into four sub disciplines physical 
anthropology or biological anthropology which studies primate behavior human 
evolution osteology forensics and population genetics cultural anthropology 
called social anthropology in the united kingdom and now often known as socio 
cultural anthropology areas studied by cultural anthropologists include social 
networks diffusion social behavior kinship patterns law politics ideology 
religion beliefs patterns in production and consumption exchange socialization 
gender and other expressions of culture with strong emphasis on the importance 
of fieldwork or participant observation i e living among the social group being 
studied for an extended period of time linguistic anthropology which studies 
variation in language across time and space the social uses of language and the 
relationship between language and culture and archaeology that studies the 
material remains of human societies archaeology itself is normally treated as a 
separate but related field in the rest of the world although closely related to 
the anthropological field of material culture which deals with physical objects 
created or used within a living or past group as mediums of understanding its 
cultural values more recently some anthropology programs began dividing the 
field into two one emphasizing the humanities and critical theory the other 
emphasizing the natural sciences and empirical observation historical and 
institutional context main article history of anthropology the anthropologist t 
j brewer once characterized anthropology as the most scientific of the 
humanities and the most humanistic of the sciences understanding how 
anthropology developed contributes to understanding how it fits into other 
academic disciplines contemporary anthropologists claim a number of earlier 
thinkers as their forebearers and the discipline has several sources however 
anthropology can best be understood as an outgrowth of the age of enlightenment 
it was during this period that europeans attempted systematically to study 
human behavior traditions of jurisprudence history philology and sociology 
developed during this time and informed the development of the social sciences 
of which anthropology was a part at the same time the romantic reaction to the 
enlightenment produced thinkers such as herder and later wilhelm dilthey whose 
work formed the basis for the culture concept which is central to the 
discipline institutionally anthropology emerged from natural history expounded 
by authors such as buffon this was the study of human beings typically people 
living in european colonies thus studying the language culture physiology and 
artifacts of european colonies was more or less equivalent to studying the 
flora and fauna of those places it was for this reason for instance that lewis 
henry morgan could write monographs on both the league of the iroquois and the 
american beaver and his works this is also why the material culture of 
civilized nations such as china have historically been displayed in fine arts 
museums alongside european art while artifacts from africa or native north 
american cultures were displayed in natural history museums with dinosaur bones 
and nature dioramas this being said curatorial practice has changed 
dramatically in recent years and it would be wrong to see anthropology as 
merely an extension of colonial rule and european chauvinism since its 
relationship to imperialism was and is complex anthropology grew increasingly 
distinct from natural history and by the end of the nineteenth century the 
discipline began to crystallize into its modern form by one nine three five for 
example it was possible for t k penniman to write a history of the discipline 
entitled a hundred years of anthropology early anthropology was dominated by 
the comparative method it was assumed that all societies passed through a 
single evolutionary process from the most primitive to most advanced non 
european societies were thus seen as evolutionary living fossils that could be 
studied in order to understand the european past scholars wrote histories of 
prehistoric migrations which were sometimes valuable but often also fanciful it 
was during this time that europeans first accurately traced polynesian 
migrations across the pacific ocean for instance although some of them believed 
it originated in egypt finally the concept of race was actively discussed as a 
way to classify and rank human beings based on inherent biological difference 
in the twentieth century academic disciplines began to organize around three 
main domains the sciences seeks to derive natural laws through reproducible and 
falsifiable experiments the humanities reflected an attempt to study different 
national traditions in the form of history and the arts as an attempt to 
provide people in emerging nation states with a sense of coherence the social 
sciences emerged at this time as an attempt to develop scientific methods to 
address social phenomena in an attempt to provide a universal basis for social 
knowledge anthropology does not easily fit into one of these categories and 
different branches of anthropology draw on one or more of these domains drawing 
on the methods of the natural sciences as well as developing new techniques 
involving not only structured interviews but unstructured participant 
observation and drawing on the new theory of evolution through natural 
selection they proposed the scientific study of a new object humankind 
conceived of as a whole crucial to this study is the concept culture which 
anthropologists defined both as a universal capacity and propensity for social 
learning thinking and acting which they see as a product of human evolution and 
something that distinguishes homo sapiens and perhaps all species of genus homo 
from other species and as a particular adaptation to local conditions that 
takes the form of highly variable beliefs and practices thus culture not only 
transcends the opposition between nature and nurture it transcends and absorbs 
the peculiarly european distinction between politics religion kinship and the 
economy as autonomous domains anthropology thus transcends the divisions 
between the natural sciences social sciences and humanities to explore the 
biological linguistic material and symbolic dimensions of humankind in all 
forms anthropology in the u s anthropology in the united states was pioneered 
by staff of the bureau of indian affairs and the smithsonian institution s 
bureau of american ethnology such as john wesley powell and frank hamilton 
cushing academic anthropology was established by franz boas who used his 
positions at columbia university and the american museum of natural history to 
train and develop multiple generations of students boasian anthropology was 
politically active and suspicious of research dictated by the u s government or 
wealthy patrons it was also rigorously empirical and skeptical of over 
generalizations and attempts to establish universal laws boas studied immigrant 
children in order to demonstrate that biological race was not immutable and 
that human conduct and behavior was the result of nurture rather than nature 
drawing on his german roots he argued that the world was full of distinct 
cultures rather than societies whose evolution could be measured by how much or 
how little civilization they had boas felt that each culture has to be studied 
in its particularity and argued that cross cultural generalizations like those 
made in the natural sciences were not possible in doing so boas fought 
discrimination against immigrants african americans and native north americans 
many american anthropologists adopted boas agenda for social reform and 
theories of race continue to be popular targets for anthropologists today boas 
s first generation of students included alfred kroeber robert lowie edward 
sapir and ruth benedict all of these scholars produced richly detailed studies 
which described native north america in doing so they provided a wealth of 
details used to attack the theory of a single evolutionary process kroeber and 
sapir s focus on native american languages also helped establish linguistics as 
a truly general science and free it from its historical focus on indo european 
languages the publication of alfred kroeber s textbook anthropology marked a 
turning point in american anthropology after three decades of amassing material 
the urge to generalize grew this was most obvious in the culture and 
personality studies carried out by younger boasians such as margaret mead and 
ruth benedict influenced by psychoanalytic psychologists such as sigmund freud 
and carl jung these authors sought to understand the way that individual 
personalities were shaped by the wider cultural and social forces in which they 
grew up while such works as coming of age in samoa and the chrysanthemum and 
the sword remain popular with the american public mead and benedict never had 
the impact on the discipline of anthropology that some expected boas had 
planned for ruth benedict to succeed him as chair of columbia s anthropology 
department but she was sidelined by ralph linton and mead was limited to her 
offices at the amnh anthropology in britain whereas boas picked his opponents 
to pieces through attention to detail in britain modern anthropology was formed 
by rejecting historical reconstruction in the name of a science of society that 
focused on analyzing how societies held together in the present the two most 
important names in this tradition were alfred reginald radcliffe brown and 
bronislaw malinowski both of whom released seminal works in one nine two two 
radcliffe brown s initial fieldwork in the andaman islands was carried out in 
the old style but after reading mile durkheim he published an account of his 
research entitled simply the andaman islanders which drew heavily on the french 
sociologist over time he developed an approach known as structural 
functionalism which focused on how institutions in societies worked to balance 
out or create an equilibrium in the social system to keep it functioning 
harmoniously malinowski on the other hand advocated an unhyphenated 
functionalism which examined how society functioned to meet individual needs 
malinowski is best known not for his theory however but for his detailed 
ethnography and advances in methodology his classic argonauts of the western 
pacific advocated getting the native s point of view and an approach to field 
work that became standard in the field malinowski and radcliffe brown s success 
stem from the fact that they like boas actively trained students and 
aggressively built up institutions which furthered their programmatic ambitions 
this was particularly the case with radcliffe brown who spread his agenda for 
social anthropology by teaching at universities across the commonwealth from 
the late one nine three zero s until the post war period a string of monographs 
and edited volumes appeared which cemented the paradigm of british social 
anthropology famous ethnographies include the nuer by edward evan evans 
pritchard and the dynamics of clanship among the tallensi by meyer fortes while 
well known edited volumes include african systems of kinship and marriage and 
african political systems anthropology in france anthropology in france has a 
less clear genealogy than the british and american traditions most commentators 
consider marcel mauss to be the founder of the french anthropological tradition 
mauss was a member of durkheim s annee sociologique group and while durkheim 
and others examined the state of modern societies mauss and his collaborators 
such as henri hubert and robert hertz drew on ethnography and philology to 
analyze societies which were not as differentiated as european nation states in 
particular mauss s essay on the gift was to prove of enduring relevance in 
anthropological studies of exchange and reciprocity throughout the interwar 
years french interest in anthropology often dovetailed with wider cultural 
movements such as surrealism and primitivism which drew on ethnography for 
inspiration marcel griaule and michel leiris are examples of people who 
combined anthropology with the french avant garde during this time most of what 
is known as ethnologie was restricted to museums and anthropology had a close 
relationship with studies of folklore above all however it was claude l vi 
strauss who helped institutionalize anthropology in france in addition to the 
enormous influence his structuralism exerted across multiple disciplines l vi 
strauss established ties with american and british anthropologists at the same 
time he established centers and laboratories within france to provide an 
institutional context within anthropology while training influential students 
such as maurice godelier and francoise heritier who would prove influential in 
the world of french anthropology much of the distinct character of france s 
anthropology today is a result of the fact that most anthropology is carried 
out in nationally funded research laboratories rather than academic departments 
in universities anthropology after world war two before wwii british social 
anthropology and american cultural anthropology were still distinct traditions 
it was after the war that the two would blend to create a sociocultural 
anthropology in the one nine five zero s and mid one nine six zero s 
anthropology tended increasingly to model itself after the natural sciences 
some such as lloyd fallers and clifford geertz focused on processes of 
modernization by which newly independent states could develop others such as 
julian steward and leslie white focused on how societies evolve and fit their 
ecological niche an approach popularized by marvin harris economic anthropology 
as influenced by karl polanyi and practiced by marshall sahlins and george 
dalton focused on how traditional economics ignored cultural and social factors 
in england british social anthropology s paradigm began to fragment as max 
gluckman and peter worsley experimented with marxism and authors such as rodney 
needham and edmund leach incorporated l vi strauss s structuralism into their 
work structuralism also influenced a number of development in one nine six zero 
s and one nine seven zero s including cognitive anthropology and componential 
analysis authors such as david schneider clifford geertz and marshall sahlins 
developed a more fleshed out concept of culture as a web of meaning or 
signification which proved very popular within and beyond the discipline in 
keeping with the times much of anthropology became politicized through the 
algerian war of independence and opposition to the vietnam war marxism became a 
more and more popular theoretical approach in the discipline by the one nine 
seven zero s the authors of volumes such as reinventing anthropology worried 
about anthropology s relevance in the one nine eight zero s issues of power 
such as those examined in eric wolf s europe and the people without history 
were central to the discipline books like anthropology and the colonial 
encounter pondered anthropology s ties to colonial inequality while the immense 
popularity of theorists such as antonio gramsci and michel foucault moved 
issues of power and hegemony into the spotlight gender and sexuality became a 
popular topic as did the relationship between history and anthropology 
influenced by marshall sahlins again who drew on l vi strauss and fernand 
braudel to examine the relationship between social structure and individual 
agency in the late one nine eight zero s and one nine nine zero s authors such 
as george marcus and james clifford pondered ethnographic authority 
particularly how and why anthropological knowledge was possible and 
authoritative ethnographies became more reflexive explicitly addressing the 
author s methodology and cultural positioning and its influence on their 
ethnographic analysis this was part of a more general trend of postmodernism 
that was popular contemporaneously currently anthropologists have begun to pay 
attention to globalization medicine and biotechnology indigenous rights and the 
anthropology of europe politics of anthropology anthropology s traditional 
involvement with nonwestern cultures has involved it in politics in many 
different ways some political problems arise simply because anthropologists 
usually have more power than the people they study some have argued that the 
discipline is a form of colonialist theft in which the anthropologist gains 
power at the expense of subjects the anthropologist they argue can gain yet 
more power by exploiting knowledge and artifacts of the people he studies while 
the people he studies gain nothing or even lose in the exchange an example of 
this exploitative relationship can been seen in the collaboration in africa 
prior to world war ii of british anthropologists such as fortes and colonial 
forces more recently there have been newfound concerns about bioprospecting 
along with struggles for self representation for native peoples and the 
repatriation of indigenous remains and material culture other political 
controversies come from american anthropology s emphasis on cultural relativism 
and its long standing antipathy to the concept of race the development of 
sociobiology in the late one nine six zero s was opposed by cultural 
anthropologists such as marshall sahlins who argued that these positions were 
reductive while authors such john randal baker continued to develop the 
biological concept of race into the one nine seven zero s the rise of genetics 
has proven to be central to developments on this front recently kevin b 
macdonald criticized boasian anthropology as part of a jewish strategy to 
facilitate mass immigration and to weaken the west the culture of critique two 
zero zero two as genetics continues to advance as a science some 
anthropologists such as luca cavalli sforza have continued to transform and 
advance notions of race through the use of recent developments in genetics such 
as tracing past migrations of peoples through their mitcochondial and y 
chromosomal dna and ancestry informative markers finally anthropology has a 
history of entanglement with government intelligence agencies and anti war 
politics boas publicly objected to us participation in world war i and the 
collaboration of some anthropologists with us intelligence in contrast many of 
boas anthropologist contemporaries were active in the war effort in some form 
including dozens who served in the office of strategic services and the office 
of war information in the one nine five zero s the american anthropological 
association provided the cia information on the area specialities of its 
members and a number of anthropologists participated in the u s government s 
operation camelot during the war in vietnam at the same time many other 
anthropologists were active in the antiwar movement and passed resolutions in 
the american anthropological association aaa condemning anthropological 
involvement in covert operations anthropologists were also vocal in their 
opposition to the war in iraq although there was no consensus amongst 
practitioners of the discipline professional anthropological bodies often 
object to the use of anthropology for the benefit of the state their codes of 
ethics or statements may proscribe anthropologists from giving secret briefings 
the british association for social anthropology has called certain scholarships 
ethically dangerous for example the british association for social anthropology 
has condemned the cia s pat roberts intelligence scholars program which funds 
anthropology students at us universities in preparation for them to spy for the 
united states government the aaa s current statement of professional 
responsibility clearly states that in relation with their own government and 
with host governments no secret research no secret reports or debriefings of 
any kind should be agreed to or given anthropology is the study of human 
diversity diversity of body and behavior in the past and present anthropology 
consists of four subfields or subdisciplines physical anthropology studies the 
diversity of the human body in the past and present it includes how we acquired 
the structure of our body over time that is human evolution as well as 
differences and relationships between human populations today and their 
adaptations to their local environments it also sometimes includes the 
evolution and diversity of our nearest relatives the primates apes and monkeys 
cultural anthropology studies the diversity of human behavior in the present 
this is what most anthropologists do and what most of the public sees when they 
look at national geographic magazine or the discovery channel on tv cultural 
anthropologists travel to foreign societies although it is possible to do 
anthropology on your own society live among the people there and try as much as 
they can to understand how those people live archaeology studies the diversity 
of human behavior in the past since it studies how people lived in the past 
these people are not available for us to visit and talk to or at least not 
people who are currently living in the same way that their ancestors did in the 
past therefore archaeologists must depend on the artifacts and features that 
the people produced in the past and attempt to reconstruct their vanished way 
of life from the remnants of their culture linguistic anthropology studies the 
diversity of human language in the past and present while language is naturally 
a part of culture it is such a huge topic that anthropologists have separated 
it into its own area of study linguistic anthropologists are concerned about 
the development of languages perhaps even back to the first forms of language 
and how language changes over time they are also interested in how different 
contemporary languages differ today how they are related and how we can learn 
about things like migration and diffusion from that data they also ask how 
language is related to and reflects on other aspects of culture other sciences 
study humans too of course history economics psychology sociology even biology 
and chemistry can study humans how is anthropology different the answer is the 
anthropological perspective that is the way that anthropology approaches the 
subject and thinks about or studies humans and their behavior the 
anthropological perspective has three components one cross cultural or 
comparative anthropology investigates humans in every form that they take we 
are interested to see the entire spectrum of human bodies and behaviors trying 
to learn the range of humanity all the ways that we can be human by seeing 
humans in their every manifestation and comparing those manifestations to each 
other we can ask what is possible for humans and what is necessary for humans 
two holistic anthropology tries to relate every part of culture to every other 
part it understands that the various parts of culture are connected to each 
other and that certain combinations tend to occur or not to occur for example 
there are no hunting and gathering cultures that traditionally lived in cities 
that s just impossible we are also interested in how a people s cultures is 
connected to their environment again without high technology you are not going 
to see farming or cities in the middle of the desert or the arctic three 
relativistic this is the most profound yet controversial part of the 
anthropological perspective relativism means that the rules or norms or values 
of a culture are relative to that specific culture in other words say monogamy 
may be normal or preferred in one culture but polygamy may be normal or 
preferred in another the point is that different cultures believe different 
things or value different things or even mean different things with perhaps 
identical looking behaviors or objects when you go to another culture or even 
just interact with another culture for example when you are doing international 
business you cannot assume that other people understand things the same way you 
do in fact you should assume that they don t anthropology counsels against 
hasty judgement of a new culture aspects that a western visitor may find 
strange or distasteful can be understood when situated within that culture s 
history and cosmology understanding of the world there will be a rationality 
for the phenomenon it may be rational however according to a cultural logic 
that conflicts with western understandings malinowski s primacy of seeking to 
understand the native point of view remains fundamental to socio cultural 
anthropology today the point is that if we want to understand other people 
properly we must see what their behaviors or words or concepts mean to them not 
what they would mean to us meaning is relative to the culture that creates that 
meaning this is not to say that all things are true or even that all things are 
good cultural relativism does not necessarily entail moral relativism indeed 
the american anthropological association s qualified support one nine four 
eight one nine nine seven for the universal declaration of human rights as well 
as work by sally engle merry shows the latter is not a common anthropological 
point of view how does anthropology study culture one other way that 
anthropology is unique among the sciences that study humans is by its emphasis 
on fieldwork you cannot get to know another culture just by reading about it or 
watching movies about it at best you could learn what other people have already 
discovered but you could not learn anything new so anthropology requires 
actually going to that society and living within their culture as much as 
possible this is called participant observation this depends crucially on 
finding preferrably friendly informants within the society who will teach you 
their culture s rules of social behaviour and include you in their activities 
then as much as possible you will try to eat their food speak their language 
and live their lives often actually residing with a family in that society it 
is not easy work and it is not always fun but there is no better way to learn 
anthropological fields and subfields biological anthropology also physical 
anthropology forensic anthropology paleoethnobotany cultural anthropology also 
social anthropology anthropology of art applied anthropology cross cultural 
studies cyber anthropology development anthropology dual inheritance theory 
environmental anthropology economic anthropology ecological anthropology 
ethnography ethnomusicology feminist anthropology gender human behavioral 
ecology medical anthropology psychological anthropology political anthropology 
anthropology of religion public anthropology urban anthropology visual 
anthropology linguistic anthropology synchronic linguistics or descriptive 
linguistics diachronic linguistics or historical linguistics ethnolinguistics 
sociolinguistics archaeology external links the american anthropological 
association homepage the webpage of the largest professional organization of 
anthropologists in the world race a book by john randal baker discussing the 
origins of racial classification and oppositions to the concept anthropology 
info anthropologists as spies an article by david price examining the 
relationship between american anthropology and us intelligence services pat 
roberts intelligence program a bbc article on the program social and cultural 
anthropology in the news nearly daily updated blog anthrobase com collection of 
anthropological texts cybercultura collection of web resources about 
anthropology of cyberspace in italian anthropology net a community orientated 
anthropology web portal with user run blogs forums tags and a wiki association 
for feminist anthropology see also list of anthropologists important 
publications in anthropology anthropology mammalogy behavioural sciences 
archaeology or archeology from the greek words ancient and word speech 
discourse is the study of human cultures through the recovery documentation and 
analysis of material remains and environmental data including architecture 
artifacts biofacts human remains and landscapes the goals of archaeology are to 
document and explain the origins and development of human culture understand 
culture history chronicle cultural evolution and study human behavior and 
ecology for both prehistoric and historic societies it is considered to be one 
of the four sub fields of anthropology usage as with words such as encyclopedia 
and gynaecology archaeology traditionally has an ae combination however unlike 
other words the ae is all but universally retained contrary to popular belief 
in other parts of the world the spelling archeology is not predominant in 
united states dictionaries and would look quite odd to most americans like the 
claim that theater refers to a building and theatre refers to the performing 
arts the belief that archeology is an americanism is little more than an urban 
myth the traditional spelling archaeology continues to be used in everyday 
writing throughout the world including the u s even more so than theatre the 
alternate spelling of which while considered acceptable is preferred less often 
than not ontology and definition in the old world archaeology has tended to 
focus on the study of physical remains the methods used in recovering them and 
the theoretical and philosophical underpinnings in achieving the subject s 
goals the discipline s roots in antiquarianism and the study of latin and 
ancient greek provided it with a natural affinity with the field of history in 
the new world archaeology is more commonly devoted to the study of human 
societies and is treated as one of the four subfields of anthropology the other 
subfields of anthropology supplement the findings of archaeology in a holistic 
manner these subfields are cultural anthropology which studies behavioural 
symbolic and material dimensions of culture linguistics which studies language 
including the origins of language and language groups and physical anthropology 
which includes the study of human evolution and physical and genetic 
characteristics other disciplines also supplement archaeology such as 
paleontology paleozoology paleoethnobotany paleobotany geography geology art 
history and classics archaeology has been described as a craft that enlists the 
sciences to illuminate the humanities writing in one nine four eight the 
american archaeologist walter taylor asserted that archaeology is neither 
history nor anthropology as an autonomous discipline it consists of a method 
and a set of specialised techniques for the gathering or production of cultural 
information archaeology is an approach to understanding human culture through 
its material remains regardless of chronology in england archaeologists have 
uncovered the long lost layouts of medieval villages abandoned after the crises 
of the one four th century and the equally lost layouts of one seven th century 
parterre gardens swept away by a change in fashion in downtown new york city 
archaeologists have exhumed the one eight th century remains of the black 
burial ground traditional archaeology is viewed as the study of pre historical 
human cultures that is cultures that existed before the development of writing 
for that culture historical archaeology is the study of post writing cultures 
in the study of relatively recent cultures which have been observed and studied 
by western scholars archaeology is closely allied with ethnography this is the 
case in large parts of north america oceania siberia and other places where the 
study of archaeology mingles with the living traditions of the cultures being 
studied kennewick man is an example of archaeology interacting with modern 
culture in the study of cultures that were literate or had literate neighbours 
history and archaeology supplement one another for broader understanding of the 
complete cultural context as at hadrian s wall importance and applicability 
most of human history is not described by any written records writing did not 
exist anywhere in the world until about five zero zero zero years ago and only 
spread among a relatively small number of technologically advanced 
civilisations in contrast homo sapiens have existed for at least two zero zero 
zero zero zero years and other species of homo for millions of years see human 
evolution these civilisations are not coincidentally the best known they have 
been open to the inquiry of historians for centuries while the study of pre 
historic cultures has arisen only recently even within a civilisation that is 
literate at some levels many important human practices are not officially 
recorded any knowledge of the formative early years of human civilisation the 
development of agriculture cult practices of folk religion the rise of the 
first cities must come from archaeology even where written records do exist 
they are invariably incomplete or biased to some extent in many societies 
literacy was restricted to the elite classes such as the clergy or the 
bureaucracy of court or temple the literacy even of an aristocracy has 
sometimes been restricted to deeds and contracts the interests and world view 
of elites are often quite different from the lives and interests of the rest of 
the populace writings that were produced by people more representative of the 
general population were unlikely to find their way into libraries and be 
preserved there for posterity thus written records tend to reflect the biases 
of the literate classes and cannot be trusted as a sole source the material 
record is nearer to a fair representation of society though it is subject to 
its own inaccuracies such as sampling bias and differential preservation in 
addition to their scientific importance archaeological remains sometimes have 
political significance to descendants of the people who produced them monetary 
value to collectors or simply strong aesthetic appeal many people identify 
archaeology with the recovery of such aesthetic religious political or economic 
treasures rather than with the reconstruction of past societies this view is 
often espoused in works of popular fiction such as raiders of the lost ark the 
mummy and king solomon s mines when such unrealistic subjects are treated more 
seriously accusations of pseudoscience are invariably levelled at their 
proponents see pseudoarchaeology below however these endeavours real and 
fictional are not representative of the modern state of archaeology goals there 
is still a tremendous emphasis in the practice of archaeology on field 
techniques and methodologies these include the tasks of surveying areas in 
order to find new sites digging sites in order to unearth the cultural remains 
therein and classification and preservation techniques in order to analyse and 
keep these remains every phase of this process can be a source of information 
the goals of archaeology are not always the same there are at least three broad 
distinct theories of exactly what archaeological research should do these are 
beyond the scope of the present discussion and are discussed at length below 
nevertheless there is much common ground academic sub disciplines main article 
archaeological sub disciplines as with most academic disciplines there are a 
very large number of archaeological sub disciplines characterised by a specific 
method or type of material e g lithic analysis music archaeobotany geographical 
or chronological focus e g near eastern archaeology medieval archaeology other 
thematic concern e g landscape archaeology or a specific archaeological culture 
or civilisation e g egyptology cultural resources management cultural resources 
management crm also called heritage management in britain is a branch of 
archaeology that accounts for most research done in the united states and much 
of that in western europe as well in the united states crm archaeology has been 
a growing concern since the passage of the national historic preservation act 
of one nine six six and most of the archaeology done in that country today 
proceeds from either direct or related requirements of that measure in the 
united states the vast majority of taxpayers scholars and politicians believe 
that crm has helped to preserve much of that nation s history and prehistory 
that would have otherwise been lost in the expansion of cities dams and 
highways along with other statutes this mandates that no construction project 
on public land or involving public funds may damage an unstudied archaeological 
site the application of crm in the united kingdom is not limited to government 
funded projects since one nine nine zero ppg one six has required planners to 
consider archaeology as a material consideration in determining applications 
for new development as a result numerous archaeological organisations undertake 
mitigation work in advance of or during construction work in archaeologically 
sensitive areas at the developer s expense among the goals of crm are the 
identification preservation and maintenance of cultural sites on public and 
private lands and the removal of culturally valuable materials from areas where 
they would otherwise be destroyed by human activity such as proposed 
construction this study involves at least a cursory examination to determine 
whether or not any significant archaeological sites are present in the area 
affected by the proposed construction if these do exist time and money must be 
allotted for their excavation if initial survey and or test excavation 
indicates the presence of an extraordinarily valuable site the construction may 
be prohibited entirely crm is a thriving entity especially in the united states 
and europe where archaeologists from private companies and all levels of 
government engage in the practice of their discipline cultural resources 
management has however been criticized crm is conducted by private companies 
that bid for projects by submitting proposals outlining the work to be done and 
an expected budget it is not unheard of for the agency responsible for the 
construction to simply choose the proposal that asks for the least funding crm 
archaeologists face considerable time pressure often being forced to complete 
their work in a fraction of the time that might be allotted for a purely 
scholarly endeavour field methods survey a modern archaeological project often 
begins with a survey regional survey is the attempt to systematically locate 
previously unknown sites in a region site survey is the attempt to 
systematically locate features of interest such as houses and middens within a 
site each of these two goals may be accomplished with largely the same methods 
survey was not widely practiced in the early days of archaeology cultural 
historians and prior researchers were usually content with discovering the 
locations of monumental sites from the local populace and excavating only the 
plainly visible features there gordon willey pioneered the technique of 
regional settlement pattern survey in one nine four nine in the viru valley of 
coastal peru and survey of all levels became prominent with the rise of 
processual archaeology some years later survey work has many benefits if 
performed as a preliminary exercise to or even in place of excavation it 
requires relatively little time and expense because it does not require 
processing large volumes of soil to search out artefacts nevertheless surveying 
a large region or site can be expensive so archaeologists often employ sampling 
methods it avoids ethical issues of particular concern to descendant peoples 
associated with destroying a site through excavation it is the only way to 
gather some forms of information such as settlement patterns and settlement 
structure survey data are commonly assembled into maps which may show surface 
features and or artefact distribution the simplest survey technique is surface 
survey it involves combing an area usually on foot but sometimes with the use 
of mechanised transport to search for features or artefacts visible on the 
surface surface survey cannot detect sites or features that are completely 
buried under earth or overgrown with vegetation surface survey may also include 
mini excavation techniques such as augers corers and shovel test pits aerial 
survey is conducted using cameras attached to aircraft balloons or even kites a 
bird s eye view is useful for quick mapping of large or complex sites aerial 
imaging can also detect many things not visible from the surface plants growing 
above a stone structure such as a wall will develop more slowly while those 
above other types of features such as middens may develop more rapidly 
photographs of ripening grain which changes colour rapidly at maturation have 
revealed buried structures with great precision aerial survey also employs 
infrared ground penetrating radar wavelengths and thermography geophysical 
survey is the most effective way to see beneath the ground magnetometers detect 
minute deviations in the earth s magnetic field caused by iron artefacts kilns 
some types of stone structures and even ditches and middens devices that 
measure the electrical resistivity of the soil are also widely used most soils 
are moist below the surface which gives them a relatively low resistivity 
features such as hard packed floors or concentrations of stone have a higher 
resistivity although some archaeologists consider the use of metal detectors to 
be tantamount to treasure hunting others deem them an effective tool in 
archaeological surveying examples of formal archaeological use of metal 
detectors include musketball distribution analysis on english civil war 
battlefields metal distribution analysis prior to excavation of a nineteenth 
century ship wreck and service cable location during evaluation metal 
detectorists have also contributed to the archaeological record where they have 
made detailed records of their results and refrained from raising artifacts 
from their archaeological context in the uk metal detectorists have been 
solicited for involvement in the portable antiquities scheme regional survey in 
maritime archaeology uses side scan sonar excavation archaeological excavation 
existed even when the field was still the domain of amateurs and it remains the 
source of the majority of data recovered in most field projects it can reveal 
several types of information usually not accessible to survey such as 
stratigraphy three dimensional structure and verifiably primary context modern 
excavation techniques require that the precise locations of objects and 
features known as their provenance or provenience be recorded this always 
involves determining their horizontal locations and sometimes vertical position 
as well also see primary laws of archaeology similarly their association or 
relationship with nearby objects and features needs to be recorded for later 
analysis this allows the archaeologist to deduce what artefacts and features 
were likely used together and which may be from different phases of activity 
for example excavation of a site reveals its stratigraphy if a site was 
occupied by a succession of distinct cultures artefacts from more recent 
cultures will lie above those from more ancient cultures excavation is the most 
expensive phase of archaeological research also as a destructive process it 
carries ethical concerns as a result very few sites are excavated in their 
entirety sampling is even more important in excavation than in survey it is 
common for large mechanical equipment such as backhoes jcbs to be used in 
excavation especially to remove the topsoil overburden though this method is 
increasingly used with great caution following this rather dramatic step the 
exposed area is usually hand cleaned with trowels or hoes to ensure that all 
features are apparent the next task is to form a site plan and then use it to 
help decide the method of excavation features dug into the natural subsoil are 
normally excavated in portions in order to produce a visible archaeological 
section for recording scaled plans and sections of individual features are all 
drawn on site black and white and colour photographs of them are taken and 
recording sheets are filled in describing the context of each all this 
information serves as a permanent record of the now destroyed archaeology and 
is used in describing and interpreting the site post excavation analysis once 
artefacts and structures have been excavated or collected from surface surveys 
it is necessary to properly study them to gain as much data as possible this 
process is known as post excavation analysis and is normally the most time 
consuming part of the archaeological investigation it is not uncommon for the 
final excavation reports on major sites to take years to be published at its 
most basic the artefacts found are cleaned catalogued and compared to published 
collections in order to classify them typologically and to identify other sites 
with similar artefact assemblages however a much more comprehensive range of 
analytical techniques are available through archaeological science meaning that 
artefacts can be dated and their compositions examined the bones plants and 
pollen collected from a site can all be analysed using the techniques of 
zooarchaeology paleoethnobotany and palynology while any texts can usually be 
deciphered these techniques frequently provide information that would not 
otherwise be known and therefore contribute greatly to the understanding of a 
site history of archaeology main article history of archaeology the history of 
archaeology has been one of increasing professionalisation and the use of an 
increasing range of techniques to obtain as much data on the site being 
examined as possible excavations of ancient monuments and the collection of 
antiquities have been taking place for thousands of years but these were mostly 
for the extraction of valuable or aesthetically pleasing artefacts it was only 
in the one nine th century that the systematic study of the past through its 
physical remains began to be carried out archaeological methods were developed 
by both interested amateurs and professionals including augustus pitt rivers 
and william flinders petrie this process was continued in the two zero th 
century by such people as mortimer wheeler whose highly disciplined approach to 
excavation greatly improved the quality of evidence that could be obtained 
during the two zero th century the development of urban archaeology and then 
rescue archaeology have been important factors as has the development of 
archaeological science which has greatly increased the amount of data that it 
is possible to obtain archaeological theory main article archaeological theory 
there is no single theory of archaeology and even definitions are disputed 
until the mid two zero th century and the introduction of technology there was 
a general consensus that archaeology was closely related to both history and 
anthropology the first major phase in the history of archaeological theory is 
commonly referred to as cultural or culture history which was developed during 
the late one nine th and early two zero th centuries in the one nine six zero s 
a number of young primarily american archaeologists such as lewis binford 
rebelled against the paradigms of cultural history they proposed a new 
archaeology which would be more scientific and anthropological with hypothesis 
testing and the scientific method very important parts of what became known as 
processual archaeology in the one nine eight zero s a new movement arose led by 
the british archaeologists michael shanks christopher tilley daniel miller and 
ian hodder it questioned processualism s appeals to science and impartiality 
and emphasised the importance of relativism becoming known as post processual 
archaeology however this approach has been criticised by processualists as 
lacking scientific rigour the validity of both processualism and post 
procuessualism is still under debate archaeological theory now borrows from a 
wide range of influences including neo darwinian evolutionary thought 
phenomenology postmodernism agency theory cognitive science functionalism 
gender based and feminist archaeology and systems theory public archaeology 
early archaeology was largely an attempt to uncover spectacular artifacts and 
features or to explore vast and mysterious abandoned cities such pursuits 
continue to fascinate the public portrayed in books such as king solomon s 
mines and films such as the mummy and raiders of the lost ark much thorough and 
productive research has indeed been conducted in dramatic locales such as cop n 
and the valley of the kings but the stuff of modern archaeology is not so 
reliably sensational in addition archaeological adventure stories tend to 
ignore the painstaking work involved in modern survey excavation and data 
processing techniques some archaeologists refer to such portrayals as 
pseudoarchaeology nevertheless archaeology has profited from its portrayal in 
the mainstream media many practitioners point to the childhood excitement of 
indiana jones films and tomb raider games as the inspiration for them to enter 
the field archaeologists are also very much reliant on public support the 
question of exactly who they are doing their work for is often discussed 
without a strong public interest in the subject often sparked by significant 
finds and celebrity archaeologists it would be a great deal harder for 
archaeologists to gain the political and financial support they require in the 
uk popular archaeology programmes such as time team and meet the ancestors have 
resulted in a huge upsurge in public interest where possible archaeologists now 
make more provision for public involvement and outreach in larger projects than 
they once did however the move towards being more professional has meant that 
volunteer places are now relegated to unskilled labour and even this is less 
freely available than before developer funded excavation necessitates a well 
trained staff that can work quickly and accurately observing the necessary 
health and safety and indemnity insurance issues involved in working on a 
modern building site with tight deadlines certain charities and local 
government bodies sometimes offer places on research projects either as part of 
academic work or as a defined community project there is also a flourishing 
industry selling places on commercial training excavations and archaeological 
holiday tours archaeologists prize local knowledge and often liaise with local 
historical and archaeological societies anyone looking to get involved in the 
field without having to pay to do so should contact a local group 
pseudoarchaeology main article pseudoarchaeology pseudoarchaeology is an 
umbrella term for all activities that claim to be archaeological but in fact 
violate commonly accepted archaeological practices it includes much fictional 
archaeological work discussed above as well as some actual activity many non 
fiction authors have ignored the scientific methods of processual archaeology 
or the specific critiques of it contained in post processualism an example of 
this type is the writing of erich von d niken his chariots of the gods one nine 
six eight together with many subsequent lesser known works expounds a theory of 
ancient contacts between human civilisation on earth and more technologically 
advanced extraterrestrial civilisations this theory known as palaeocontact 
theory is not exclusively d niken s nor did the idea originate with him works 
of this nature are usually marked by the renunciation of well established 
theories on the basis of limited evidence and the interpretation of evidence 
with a preconceived theory in mind looting looting of archaeological sites by 
people in search of hoards of buried treasure is an ancient problem for 
instance many of the tombs of the egyptian pharaohs were looted in antiquity 
the advent of archaeology has made ancient sites objects of great scientific 
and public interest but it has also attracted unwelcome attention to the works 
of past peoples a brisk commercial demand for artefacts encourages looting and 
the illicit antiquities trade which smuggles items abroad to private collectors 
looters damage the integrity of a historic site deny archaeologists valuable 
information that would be learnt from excavation and are often deemed to be 
robbing local people of their heritage the popular consciousness often 
associates looting with poor third world countries many are former homes to 
many well known ancient civilizations but lack the financial resources or 
political will to protect even the most significant sites certainly the high 
prices that intact objects can command relative to a poor farmer s income make 
looting a tempting financial proposition for some local people however looting 
has taken its toll in places as rich and populous as the united states and 
western europe as well abandoned towns of the ancient sinagua people of arizona 
clearly visible in the desert landscape have been destroyed in large numbers by 
treasure hunters sites in more densely populated areas farther east have also 
been looted where looting is proscribed by law it takes place under cover of 
night with the metal detector a common instrument used to identify profitable 
places to dig public outreach motivated by a desire to halt looting curb 
pseudoarchaeology and to secure greater public funding and appreciation for 
their work archaeologists are mounting public outreach campaigns they seek to 
stop looting by informing prospective artefact collectors of the provenance of 
these goods and by alerting people who live near archaeological sites of the 
threat of looting and the danger that it poses to science and their own 
heritage common methods of public outreach include press releases and the 
encouragement of school field trips to sites under excavation the final 
audience for archaeologists work is the public and it is increasingly realised 
that their work is ultimately being done to benefit and inform them the 
putative social benefits of local heritage awareness are also being promoted 
with initiatives to increase civic and individual pride through projects such 
as community excavation projects and better interpretation and presentation of 
existing sites descendant peoples in the united states examples such as the 
case of kennewick man have illustrated the tensions between native americans 
and archaeologists which can be summarised as a conflict between a need to 
remain respectful towards burials sacred sites and the academic benefit from 
studying them for years american archaeologists dug on indian burial grounds 
and other places considered sacred removing artefacts and human remains to 
storage facilities for further study in some cases human remains were not even 
thoroughly studied but instead archived rather than reburied furthermore 
western archaeologists views of the past often differ from those of tribal 
peoples the west views time as linear for many natives it is cyclic from a 
western perspective the past is long gone from a native perspective disturbing 
the past can have dire consequences in the present to an archaeologist the past 
is long gone and must be reconstructed through its material remains to 
indigenous peoples it is often still alive as a consequence of this american 
indians attempted to prevent archaeological excavation of sites inhabited by 
their ancestors while american archaeologists believed that the advancement of 
scientific knowledge was a valid reason to continue their studies this 
contradictory situation was addressed by the native american graves protection 
and repatriation act nagpra one nine nine zero which sought to reach a 
compromise by limiting the right of research institutions to possess human 
remains due in part to the spirit of postprocessualism some archaeologists have 
begun to actively enlist the assistance of indigenous peoples likely to be 
descended from those under study archaeologists have also been obliged to re 
examine what constitutes an archaeological site in view of what native peoples 
believe to constitute sacred space to many native peoples natural features such 
as lakes mountains or even individual trees have cultural significance 
australian archaeologists especially have explored this issue and attempted to 
survey these sites in order to give them some protection from being developed 
such work requires close links and trust between archaeologists and the people 
they are trying to help and at the same time study while this cooperation 
presents a new set of challenges and hurdles to fieldwork it has benefits for 
all parties involved tribal elders cooperating with archaeologists can prevent 
the excavation of areas of sites that they consider sacred while the 
archaeologists gain the elders aid in interpreting their finds there have also 
been active efforts to recruit aboriginal peoples directly into the 
archaeological profession repatriation a new trend in the heated controversy 
between first nations groups and scientists is the repatriation of native 
artifacts to the original descendants an example of this occurred june two one 
two zero zero five when a community members and elders from a number of the one 
zero algonquian nations in the ottawa area convened on the kitigan zibi 
reservation in kanawagi quebec to inter ancestral human remains and burial 
goods some dating back six zero zero zero years the ceremony marked the end of 
a journey spanning thousands of years and many miles the remains and artifacts 
including beads tools and weapons were originally excavated from various sites 
in the ottawa valley including morrison and the allumette islands they had been 
part of the canadian museum of civilization s research collection for decades 
some since the late one eight zero zero s elders from various algonquin 
communities conferred on an appropriate reburial eventually deciding on 
traditional redcedar and birchbark boxes lined with redcedar chips muskrat and 
beaver pelts now an inconspicuous rock mound marks the reburial site where 
close to nine zero boxes of various sizes are buried although negotiations were 
at times tense between the kitigan zibi community and museum they were able to 
reach agreement source canadian geographic online see also list of significant 
archaeological discoveries list of archaeological sites sorted by country list 
of archaeologists biblical archaeology list of archaeological periods 
prehistory external links archeologia belga the alphabetical of archaeology 
french archaeology archaeology news current news and information pertaining to 
all areas of archaeology plus free news feeds for webmasters north pacific 
prehistory is an academic journal specialising in northeast asian and north 
american archaeology excavation sites archaeological work and volunteer pages 
archaeology in popular culture anthropology resources on the internet 
anthropology resources on the internet a web directory part of the www virtual 
library with over four zero zero zero links grouped in specialised topics 
archaeology magazine published by the archaeological institute of america 
archaeology directory directory of archaeological topics on the web the two 
zero zero three iraq war a history of archaeological thought cambridge 
cambridge university press isbn zero five two one three three eight one eight 
two anthropology archaeology humanities occupations social sciences 
agricultural science is a broad multidisciplinary field that encompasses the 
parts of exact natural economic and social sciences that are used in the 
practice and understanding of agriculture veterinary science but not animal 
science is often excluded from the definition agriculture and agricultural 
science the two terms are often confused however they cover different concepts 
agriculture is the set of activities that transform the environment for the 
production of animals and plants for human use agriculture concerns techniques 
including the application of agronomic research agronomy is research and 
development related to studying and improving plant based agriculture 
agricultural sciences include research and development on production techniques 
e g irrigation management recommended nitrogen inputs improving production in 
terms of quantity and quality e g selection of drought resistant crops and 
animals development of new pesticides yield sensing technologies simulation 
models of crop growth in vitro cell culture techniques transformation of 
primary products into end consumer products e g production preservation and 
packaging of dairy products prevention and correction of adverse environmental 
effects e g soil degradation waste management bioremediation theoretical 
production ecology relating to crop production modeling traditional 
agricultural systems such as which serve to feed most people in the world and 
which often retain integration with nature in a way that hs proven more 
sustainable than modern systems food production and demand on a global basis 
with special attention paid to the major producers of china and india 
agricultural science a local science with the exception of theoretical agronomy 
research in agronomy more than in any other field is strongly related to local 
areas it can be considered a science of ecoregions because it is closely linked 
to soil properties and climate which are never exactly the same from one place 
to another many people think an agricultural production system relying on local 
weather soil characteristics and specific crops has to be studied locally 
others feel a need to know and understand production systems in as many areas 
as possible and the human dimension of interation with nature history of 
agricultural science main article history of agricultural science agricultural 
science is seen by some to have began with mendel s insightful genetc work but 
in modern terms might be better dated from the chemical fertilizer outputs of 
plant physiological understanding in eighteenth century germany today it is 
very different from what it was even in one nine five zero intensification of 
agriculture since the one nine six zero s in developed and developing countries 
often referred to as the green revolution was closely tied to progress made in 
selecting and improving crops and animals for high productivity as well as to 
developing additional inputs such as artificial fertilizers and phytosanitary 
products as the oldest and largest human intervention in nature the 
environmental impact of agriculture in general and more recently intensive 
agriculture industrial development and population growth have raised many 
questions among agricultural scientists and have led to the development and 
emergence of new fields these include technological fields that assume the 
solution to technological problems lies in better technology such as integrated 
pest management waste treatment technologies landscape architecture genomics 
and agricultural philosophy fields that include references to food production 
as something essentially different from non essential eeconomic goods in fact 
the interaction between these two approaches provide a fertile field for deeper 
understanding in agricultural science new technologies such as biotechnology 
and computer science for data processing and storage and technological advances 
have made it possible to develop new research fields including genetic 
engineering agrophysics improved statistical analysis and precision farming 
balancing these as above are the natural and human sciences of agricultural 
science that seek to understand the human nature interactions of traditional 
agriculture including interaction of religion and agriculture and the non 
material components of agricultural production systems prominent agricultural 
scientists norman borlaug luther burbank louis pasteur gregor mendel ren dumont 
george washington carver agricultural science and agriculture crisis 
agriculture sciences seek to feed the world s population while preventing 
biosafety problems that may affect human health and the environment this 
requires promoting good management of natural resources and respect for the 
environment and increasingly concern for the psychological wellbeing of all 
concerned in the food production and consumption system economic environmental 
and social aspects of agriculture sciences are subjects of ongoing debate 
recent crises such as avian flu mad cow disease and issues such as the use of 
genetically modified organisms illustrate the complexity and importance of this 
debate fields of agricultural science agricultural engineering agricultural 
philosophy biosystems engineering aquaculture agronomy and horticulture 
agrophysics animal science plant fertilization animal and human nutrition plant 
protection and animal health soil science especially edaphology water science 
biotechnology genetic engineering and microbiology farming equipment irrigation 
and water management agricultural economics food science environmental science 
and engineering waste management ecology and environment theoretical production 
ecology see also agricultural sciences basic topics agrology agronomy history 
of agricultural science agriculture agronomy soil science alchemist s 
laboratory by hans vredman de vries c one five nine five alchemy is an early 
protoscientific and philosophical discipline combining elements of chemistry 
metallurgy physics medicine astrology semiotics mysticism spiritualism and art 
alchemy has been practiced in ancient egypt india and china in classical greece 
and rome in the islamic empire and then in europe up to the one nine th century 
in a complex network of schools and philosophical systems spanning at least two 
five zero zero years western alchemy has always been closely connected with 
hermeticism a philosophical and spiritual system that traces its roots to 
hermes trismegistus a syncretic egyptian greek deity and legendary alchemist 
these two disciplines influenced the birth of rosicrucianism an important 
esoteric movement of the one seven th century in the one nine th century as 
mainstream alchemy evolved into modern chemistry its mystic and hermetic 
aspects became the focus of a modern spiritual alchemy where material 
manipulations are viewed as mere symbols of spiritual transformations the 
alchemists did not follow what is now known as the scientific method and much 
of the knowledge they produced was later found to be banal limited wrong or 
meaningless today the discipline is of interest mainly to historians of science 
and philosophy and for its mystic esoteric and artistic aspects nevertheless 
alchemy was one of the main precursors of modern sciences and we owe to the 
ancient alchemists the discovery of many substances and processes that are the 
mainstay of modern chemical and metallurgical industries overview the alchemist 
by sir william fettes douglas alchemy as a proto science the common perception 
of alchemists is that they were pseudo scientists crackpots and charlatans who 
attempted to turn lead into gold believed that the universe was composed of the 
four elements of earth air fire and water and spent most of their time 
concocting miraculous remedies poisons and magic potions this picture is rather 
unfair although many alchemists were indeed crackpots and charlatans many were 
well meaning and intelligent scholars who were simply struggling to make sense 
of a subject which as we now know was far beyond the reach of their tools these 
people were basically proto scientists who attempted to explore and investigate 
the nature of chemical substances and processes they had to rely on 
unsystematic experimentation traditional know how rules of thumb and plenty of 
speculative thought to fill in the wide gaps in existing knowledge given these 
conditions the mystic character of alchemy is quite understandable to the early 
alchemist chemical transformations could only seem like magical phenomena 
governed by incomprehensible laws whose potential and limitations he had no way 
of knowing having discovered that a specific procedure could turn an earth like 
ore into glistening metal it was only natural to speculate that some different 
procedure could turn a metal into another at the same time it was clear to the 
alchemists that something was generally being conserved in chemical processes 
even in the most dramatic changes of physical state and appearance i e that 
substances contained some principles that could be hidden under many outer 
forms and revealed by proper manipulation throughout the history of the 
discipline alchemists struggled very hard to understand the nature of these 
principles and find some order and sense in the results of their chemical 
experiments which were often undermined by impure or poorly characterized 
reagents the lack of quantitative measurements and confusing and inconsistent 
nomenclature in spite of those difficulties and of many false turns and loops 
the alchemists managed to make steady progress in the understanding of the 
natural world to them we owe the discovery of many important substances and 
chemical processes which paved the way for the modern science of chemistry and 
are still the mainstay of today s chemical and metallurgical industries alchemy 
as a philosophical and spiritual discipline the best known goals of the 
alchemists were the transmutation of common metals into gold or silver and the 
creation of a panacea a remedy that supposedly would cure all diseases and 
prolong life indefinitely starting with the middle ages european alchemists 
invested much effort on the search for the philosopher s stone a mythical 
substance that was believed to be an essential ingredient for either or both of 
those goals alchemists enjoyed prestige and support through the centuries 
though not for their pursuit of those unattainable goals nor the mystic and 
philosophical speculation that dominates their literature rather it was for 
their mundane contributions to the chemical industries of the day ore testing 
and refining metalworking production of ink dyes paints and cosmetics leather 
tanning ceramics and glass manufacture preparation of extracts and liquors and 
so on it seems that the preparation of aqua vitae the water of life was a 
fairly popular experiment among european alchemists on the other hand 
alchemists never had the intellectual tools nor the motivation to separate the 
physical chemical aspects of their craft from the metaphysical interpretations 
indeed from antiquity until well into the modern age a physics devoid of 
metaphysical insight would have been as unsatisfying as a metaphysics devoid of 
physical manifestation for one thing the lack of common words for chemical 
concepts and processes as well as the need for secrecy led alchemists to borrow 
the terms and symbols of biblical and pagan mythology astrology kabbalah and 
other mystic and esoteric fields so that even the plainest chemical recipe 
ended up reading like an abstruse magic incantation moreover alchemists sought 
in those fields the theoretical frameworks into which they could fit their 
growing collection of disjointed experimental facts starting with the middle 
ages some alchemists increasingly came to view these metaphysical aspects as 
the true foundation of alchemy and chemical substances physical states and 
material processes as mere metaphors for spiritual entities states and 
transformations thus both the transmutation of common metals into gold and the 
universal panacea symbolized evolution from an imperfect diseased corruptible 
and ephemeral state towards a perfect healthy incorruptible and everlasting 
state and the philosopher s stone then represented some mystic key that would 
make this evolution possible applied to the alchemist himself the twin goal 
symbolized his evolution from ignorance to enlightenment and the stone 
represented some hidden spiritual truth or power that would lead to that goal 
in texts that are written according to this view the cryptic alchemical symbols 
diagrams and textual imagery of late alchemical works typically contain 
multiple layers of meanings allegories and references to other equally cryptic 
works and must be laborously decoded in order to discover their true meaning 
some humanistic scholars now see these spiritual and metaphysical allegories as 
the truest and most valuable aspect of alchemy and even claim that the 
development of chemistry out of alchemy was a corruption of the original 
hermetic tradition this is the view espoused by contemporary practitioners of 
spiritual alchemy most scientists on the other hand tend to take quite the 
opposite view to them the path from the material side of alchemy to modern 
chemistry was the straight road in the evolution of the discipline while the 
metaphysically oriented brand of alchemy was a wrong turn that led to nowhere 
in either view however the na ve interpretations of some practitoners or the 
fraudulent hopes fostered by others should not diminish the contribution of the 
more sincere alchemists alchemy and astrology since its earliest times alchemy 
has been closely connected to astrology which in islam and europe generally 
meant the traditional babylonian greek school of astrology alchemical systems 
often postulated that each of the seven planets known to the ancients ruled or 
was associated with a certain metal see the separate article on astrology and 
alchemy for further details alchemy in the age of science up to the one eight 
th century alchemy was actually considered serious science in europe for 
instance isaac newton devoted considerably more of his time and writing to the 
study of alchemy than he did to either optics or physics for which he is famous 
see isaac newton s occult studies other eminent alchemists of the western world 
are roger bacon saint thomas aquinas tycho brahe thomas browne and parmigianino 
the decline of alchemy began in the one eight th century with the birth of 
modern chemistry which provided a more precise and reliable framework for 
matter transmutations and medicine within a new grand design of the universe 
based on rational materialism in the first half of the nineteenth century one 
established chemist baron carl reichenbach researched on concepts similar to 
the old alchemy such as the odic force but his research did not enter the 
mainstream of scientific discussion matter transmutation the old goal of 
alchemy enjoyed a moment in the sun in the two zero th century when physicists 
were able to convert lead atoms into gold atoms via a nuclear reaction however 
the new gold atoms being unstable isotopes lasted for under five seconds before 
they broke apart more recently reports of table top element transmutation by 
means of electrolysis or sonic cavitation were the pivot of the cold fusion 
controversy of one nine eight nine none of those claims have yet been reliably 
duplicated alchemical symbolism has been occasionally used in the two zero th 
century by psychologists and philosophers carl jung reexamined alchemical 
symbolism and theory and began to show the inner meaning of alchemical work as 
a spiritual path alchemical philosophy symbols and methods have enjoyed 
something of a renaissance in post modern contexts such as the new age movement 
even some physicists have played with alchemical ideas in books such as the tao 
of physics and the dancing wu li masters alchemy as a subject of historical 
research the history of alchemy has become a vigorous academic field as the 
obscure hermetic of course language of the alchemists is gradually being 
deciphered historians are becoming more aware of the intellectual connections 
between that discipline and other facets of western cultural history such as 
the sociology and psychology of the intellectual communities kabbalism 
spiritualism rosicrucianism and other mystic movements cryptography witchcraft 
and of course the evolution of science and philosophy etymology the word 
alchemy comes from the arabic al k miya or al kh miya or which might be formed 
from the article al and the greek word chumeia meaning cast together pour 
together weld alloy etc from khumatos that which is poured out an ingot or from 
persian kimia meaning gold a decree of diocletian written about three zero zero 
ce in greek speaks against the ancient writings of the egyptians which treat of 
the kh mia transmutation of gold and silver it has been suggested that the 
arabic word al k miya actually means the egyptian science borrowing from the 
coptic word for egypt k me or its equivalent in the mediaeval bohairic dialect 
of coptic kh me the coptic word derives from demotic km itself from ancient 
egyptian kmt the ancient egyptian word referred to both the country and the 
colour black egypt was the black land by contrast with the red land the 
surrounding desert so this etymology could also explain the nickname egyptian 
black arts however this theory may be just an example of folk etymology history 
extract and symbol key from a one seven th century book on alchemy the symbols 
used have a one to one correspondence with symbols used in astrology at the 
time alchemy encompasses several philosophical traditions spanning some four 
millennia and three continents these traditions general penchant for cryptic 
and symbolic language makes it hard to trace their mutual influences and 
genetic relationships one can distinguish at least two major strands which 
appear to be largely independent at least in their earlier stages chinese 
alchemy centered in china and its zone of cultural influence and western 
alchemy whose center has shifted over the millennia between egypt greece and 
rome the islamic world and finally back to europe chinese alchemy was closely 
connected to taoism whereas western alchemy developed its own philosophical 
system with only superficial connections to the major western religions it is 
still an open question whether these two strands share a common origin or to 
what extent they influenced each other alchemy in ancient egypt the origin of 
western alchemy may generally be traced to ancient pharaonic egypt metallurgy 
and mysticism were inexorably tied together in the ancient world as the 
transformation of drab ore into shining metal must have seemed to be an act of 
magic governed by mysterious rules it is claimed therefore that alchemy in 
ancient egypt was the domain of the priestly class egyptian alchemy is known 
mostly through the writings of ancient hellenic greek philosophers which in 
turn have often survived only in islamic translations practically no original 
egyptian documents on alchemy have survived those writings if they existed were 
likely lost when the emperor diocletian ordered the burning of alchemical books 
after suppressing a revolt in alexandria two nine two which had been a center 
of egyptian alchemy nevertheless archaeological expeditions in recent times 
have unearthed evidence of chemical analysis during the naqada periods for 
example a copper tool dating to the naqada era bears evidence of having been 
used in such a way reference artifact five four three seven on display at also 
the process of tanning animal skins was already known in predynastic egypt as 
early as the six th millennium bc although it possibly was discovered 
haphazardly other evidence indicates early alchemists in ancient egypt had 
invented mortar by four zero zero zero bc and glass by one five zero zero bc 
the chemical reaction involved in the production of calcium oxide is one of the 
oldest known references calcium oxide limekiln caco three heat cao co two 
ancient egypt additionally produced cosmetics cement faience and also pitch for 
shipbuilding papyrus had also been invented by three zero zero zero bc legend 
has it that the founder of egyptian alchemy was the god thoth called hermes 
thoth or thrice great hermes hermes trismegistus by the greek according to 
legend he wrote what were called the forty two books of knowledge covering all 
fields of knowledge including alchemy hermes s symbol was the caduceus or 
serpent staff which became one of many of alchemy s principal symbols the 
emerald tablet or hermetica of thrice great hermes which is known only through 
greek and arabic translations is generally understood to form the basis for 
western alchemical philosophy and practice called the hermetic philosophy by 
its early practitioners the first point of the emerald tablet tells the purpose 
of hermetical science in truth certainly and without doubt whatever is below is 
like that which is above and whatever is above is like that which is below to 
accomplish the miracles of one thing this is the macrocosm microcosm belief 
central to the hermetic philosophy in other words the human body the microcosm 
is affected by the exterior world the macrocosm which includes the heavens 
through astrology and the earth through the elements it has been speculated 
that a riddle from the emerald tablet it was carried in the womb by the wind 
refers to the distillation of oxygen from saltpeter a process that was unknown 
in europe until its re discovery by sendivogius in the one seven th century in 
the four th century bc the greek speaking macedonians conquered egypt and 
founded the city of alexandria in three three two this brought them into 
contact with egyptian ideas see alchemy in the greek world below chinese 
alchemy whereas western alchemy eventually centered on the transmutation of 
base metals into noble ones chinese alchemy had a more obvious connection to 
medicine the philosopher s stone of european alchemists can be compared to the 
grand elixir of immortality sought by chinese alchemists however in the 
hermetic view these two goals were not unconnected and the philosopher s stone 
was often equated with the universal panacea therefore the two traditions may 
have had more in common than it initially appears black powder may have been an 
important invention of chinese alchemists described in nine th century texts 
and used in fireworks by the one zero th century it was used in cannons by one 
two nine zero from china the use of gunpowder spread to japan the mongols the 
arab world and europe gunpowder was used by the mongols against the hungarians 
in one two four one and in europe starting with the one four th century black 
powder was most likely invented in the middle east before it found its way to 
china saltpeter the critical oxidising component was found naturally in india 
and along the salt trade routes in the middle east chinese alchemy was closely 
connected to taoist forms of medicine such as acupuncture and moxibustion and 
to martial arts such as tai chi chuan and kung fu although some tai chi schools 
believe that their art derives from the hygienic or philosophical branches of 
taoism not the alchemical indian alchemy little is known in the west about the 
character and history of indian alchemy an one one th century persian alchemist 
named al biruni reported that they have a science similar to alchemy which is 
quite peculiar to them which is called rasav tam it means the art which is 
restricted to certain operations drugs compounds and medicines most of which 
are taken from plants its principles restored the health of those who were ill 
beyond hope and gave back youth to fading old age the best example of a text 
based on this science is the vaishashik darshana of kanada fl six zero zero bc 
who described an atomic theory over a century before democritus the texts of 
ayurvedic medicine and science have aspects related to alchemy such having 
cures for all known diseases the similarities in ayurveda and alchemy are that 
both had methods used to treat people by putting oils over them some people 
have also noted certain similarities between the metaphysics of the samkhya 
philosophical tradition of hinduism and the metaphysics of alchemy whether 
there is any direct connection between the two systems is an open question the 
rasavadam was understood by very few people at the time two famous examples 
were nagarjunacharya and nityanadhiya nagarjunacharya was a buddhist monk who 
in ancient times ran the great university of nagarjuna sagar his famous book 
rasaratanakaram is a famous example of early indian medicine in traditional 
indian medicinal terminology rasa translates as mercury and nagarjunacharya was 
said to have developed a method to convert the mercury into gold much of his 
original writings are lost to us but his teachings still have strong influence 
on traditional indian medicine ayureveda to this day alchemy in the greek world 
the greek city of alexandria in egypt was a center of greek alchemical 
knowledge and retained its preeminence through most of the greek and roman 
periods the greeks appropriated the hermetical beliefs of the egyptians and 
melded with them the philosophies of pythagoreanism ionianism and gnosticism 
pythagorean philosophy is essentially the belief that numbers rule the universe 
originating from the observations of sound stars and geometric shapes like 
triangles or anything from which a ratio could be derived ionian thought was 
based on the belief that the universe could be explained through concentration 
on natural phenomena this philosophy is believed to have originated with thales 
and his pupil anaximander and later developed by plato and aristotle whose 
works came to be an integral part of alchemy according to this belief the 
universe can be described by a few unified natural laws that can be determined 
only through careful thorough and exacting philosophical explorations the third 
component introduced to hermetical philosophy by the greeks was gnosticism a 
belief prevalent in the christian and early post christian roman empire that 
the world is imperfect because it was created in a flawed manner and that 
learning about the nature of spiritual matter would lead to salvation they 
further believed that god did not create the universe in the classic sense but 
that the universe was created from him but was corrupted in the process rather 
than becoming corrupted by the transgressions of adam and eve i e original sin 
according to gnostic belief by worshipping the cosmos nature or the creatures 
of the world one worships the true god gnostics do not seek salvation from sin 
but instead seek to escape ignorance believing that sin is merely a consequence 
of ignorance platonic and neo platonic theories about universals and the 
omnipotence of god were also absorbed one very important concept introduced at 
this time originated by empedocles and developed by aristotle was that all 
things in the universe were formed from only four elements earth air water and 
fire according to aristotle each element had a sphere to which it belonged and 
to which it would return if left undisturbed the four elements of the greek 
were mostly qualitative aspects of matter not quantitative as our modern 
elements are true alchemy never regarded earth air water and fire as corporeal 
or chemical substances in the present day sense of the word the four elements 
are simply the primary and most general qualities by means of which the 
amorphous and purely quantitative substance of all bodies first reveals itself 
in differentiated form later alchemists if plato and aristotle can be called 
alchemists extensively developed the mystical aspects of this concept alchemy 
in the roman empire the romans adopted greek alchemy and metaphysics just as 
they adopted much of greek knowledge and philosophy by the end of the roman 
empire the greek alchemical philosophy had been joined to the philosophies of 
the egyptians to create the cult of hermeticism however the development of 
christianity in the empire brought a contrary line of thinking stemming from 
augustine three five four four three zero ad an early christian philosopher who 
wrote of his beliefs shortly before the fall of the roman empire in essence he 
felt that reason and faith could be used to understand god but experimental 
philosophy was evil there is also present in the soul by means of these same 
bodily sense a kind of empty longing and curiosity which aims not at taking 
pleasure in the flesh but at acquiring experience through the flesh and this 
empty curiosity he is dignified by the names of learning and science 
augustinian ideas were decidedly anti experimental yet when aristotelian 
experimental techniques were made available to the west they were not shunned 
still augustinian thought was well ingrained in medieval society and was used 
to show alchemy as being un godly much of the roman knowledge of alchemy like 
that of the greeks and egyptians is now lost in alexandria the centre of 
alchemical studies in the roman empire the art was mainly oral and in the 
interests of secrecy little was committed to paper whence the use of hermetic 
to mean secretive it is possible that some writing was done in alexandria and 
that it was subsequently lost or destroyed in fires and the turbulent periods 
that followed alchemy in the islamic world after the fall of the roman empire 
the focus of alchemical development moved to the middle east much more is known 
about islamic alchemy because it was better documented indeed most of the 
earlier writings that have come down through the years were preserved as 
islamic translations the islamic world was a melting pot for alchemy platonic 
and aristotelian thought which had already been somewhat appropriated into 
hermetical science continued to be assimilated islamic alchemists such as al 
razi latin rasis or rhazes contributed key chemical discoveries of their own 
such as the technique of distillation the words alembic and alcohol are of 
arabic origin the muriatic sulfuric and nitric acids soda potash and more from 
the arabic names of the last two substances al natrun and al qal y latinized 
into natrium and kalium come the modern symbols for sodium and potassium the 
discovery that aqua regia a mixture of nitric and muriatic acids could dissolve 
the noblest metal gold was to fuel the imagination of alchemists for the next 
millennium islamic philosophers also made great contributions to alchemical 
hermeticism the most influential author in this regard was arguably jabir ibn 
hayyan arabic latin geberus usually rendered in english as geber jabir s 
ultimate goal was takwin the artificial creation of life in the alchemical 
laboratory up to and including human life he analyzed each aristotelian element 
in terms of four basic qualities of hotness coldness dryness and moistness 
according to geber in each metal two of these qualities were interior and two 
were exterior for example lead was externally cold and dry while gold was hot 
and moist thus jabir theorized by rearranging the qualities of one metal a 
different metal would result by this reasoning the search for the philosopher s 
stone was introduced to western alchemy jabir developed an elaborate numerology 
whereby the root letters of a substance s name in arabic when treated with 
various transformations held correspondences to the element s physical 
properties it is now commonly accepted that chinese alchemy influenced arabic 
alchemists although the extent of that influence is still a matter of debate 
likewise hindu learning was assimilated into islamic alchemy but again the 
extent and effects of this are not well known alchemy in medieval europe the 
alchemist in search of the philosophers stone by joseph wright of derby one 
seven seven one because of its strong connections to the greek and roman 
cultures alchemy was rather easily accepted into christian philosophy and 
medieval european alchemists extensively absorbed islamic alchemical knowledge 
gerbert of aurillac who was later to become pope silvester ii d one zero zero 
three was among the first to bring islamic science to europe from spain later 
men such as adelard of bath who lived in the one two th century brought 
additional learning but until the one three th century the moves were mainly 
assimilative in this period there appeared some deviations from the augustinian 
principles of earlier christian thinkers saint anselm one zero three three one 
one zero nine was a benedictine who believed faith must precede rationalism as 
augustine and most theologians prior to anselm had believed but anselm put 
forth the opinion that faith and rationalism were compatible and encouraged 
rationalism in a christian context his views set the stage for the 
philosophical explosion to occur peter abelard followed anselm s work laying 
the foundation for acceptance of aristotelian thought before the first works of 
aristotle reached the west his major influence on alchemy was his belief that 
platonic universals did not have a separate existence outside of man s 
consciousness abelard also systematized the analysis of philosophical 
contradictions robert grosseteste one one seven zero one two five three was a 
pioneer of the scientific theory that would later be used and refined by the 
alchemists he took abelard s methods of analysis and added the use of 
observations experimentation and conclusions in making scientific evaluations 
grosseteste also did much work to bridge platonic and aristotelian thinking 
albertus magnus one one nine three one two eight zero and thomas aquinas one 
two two five one two seven four were both dominicans who studied aristotle and 
worked at reconciling the differences between philosophy and christianity 
aquinas also did a great deal of work in developing the scientific method he 
even went as far as claiming that universals could be discovered only through 
logical reasoning and since reason could not run in opposition to god reason 
must be compatible with theology this ran contrary to the commonly held 
platonic belief that universals were found through divine illumination alone 
magnus and aquinas were among the first to take up the examination of 
alchemical theory and could be considered to be alchemists themselves except 
that these two did little in the way of experimentation the first true 
alchemist in medieval europe was roger bacon his work did as much for alchemy 
as robert boyle s was to do for chemistry and galileo s for astronomy and 
physics bacon one two one four one two nine four was an oxford franciscan who 
explored optics and languages in addition to alchemy the franciscan ideals of 
taking on the world rather than rejecting the world led to his conviction that 
experimentation was more important than reasoning of the three ways in which 
men think that they acquire knowledge of things authority reasoning and 
experience only the last is effective and able to bring peace to the intellect 
bacon p three six seven experimental science controls the conclusions of all 
other sciences it reveals truths which reasoning from general principles would 
never have discovered roger bacon has also been attributed with originating the 
search for the philosopher s stone and the elixir of life that medicine which 
will remove all impurities and corruptibilities from the lesser metals will 
also in the opinion of the wise take off so much of the corruptibility of the 
body that human life may be prolonged for many centuries the idea of 
immortality was replaced with the notion of long life after all man s time on 
earth was simply to wait and prepare for immortality in the world of god 
immortality on earth did not mesh with christian theology bacon was not the 
only alchemist of the high middle ages but he was the most significant his 
works were used by countless alchemists of the fifteenth through nineteenth 
centuries other alchemists of bacon s time shared several traits first and most 
obviously nearly all were members of the clergy this was simply because few 
people outside the parochial schools had the education to examine the arabic 
derived works also alchemy at this time was sanctioned by the church as a good 
method of exploring and developing theology alchemy was interesting to the wide 
variety of churchmen because it offered a rationalistic view of the universe 
when men were just beginning to learn about rationalism so by the end of the 
thirteenth century alchemy had developed into a fairly structured system of 
belief adepts believed in the macrocosm microcosm theories of hermes that is to 
say they believed that processes that affect minerals and other substances 
could have an effect on the human body e g if one could learn the secret of 
purifying gold one could use the technique to purify the human soul they 
believed in the four elements and the four qualities as described above and 
they had a strong tradition of cloaking their written ideas in a labyrinth of 
coded jargon set with traps to mislead the uninitiated finally the alchemists 
practiced their art they actively experimented with chemicals and made 
observations and theories about how the universe operated their entire 
philosophy revolved around their belief that man s soul was divided within 
himself after the fall of adam by purifying the two parts of man s soul man 
could be reunited with god in the fourteenth century these views underwent a 
major change william of ockham an oxford franciscan who died in one three four 
nine attacked the thomist view of compatibility between faith and reason his 
view widely accepted today was that god must be accepted on faith alone he 
could not be limited by human reason of course this view was not incorrect if 
one accepted the postulate of a limitless god versus limited human reasoning 
capability but it virtually erased alchemy from practice in the fourteenth and 
fifteenth centuries pope john xxii in the early one three zero zero s issued an 
edict against alchemy which effectively removed all church personnel from the 
practice of the art the climate changes black plague and increase in warfare 
and famine that characterized this century no doubt also served to hamper 
philosophical pursuits in general nicholas flamel had these mysterious 
alchemical symbols carved on his tomb in the church of the holy innocents in 
paris alchemy was kept alive by men such as nicolas flamel who was noteworthy 
only because he was one of the few alchemists writing in those troubled times 
flamel lived from one three three zero to one four one seven and would serve as 
the archetype for the next phase of alchemy he was not a religious scholar as 
were many of his predecessors and his entire interest in the subject revolved 
around the pursuit of the philosopher s stone which he is reputed to have found 
his work spends a great deal of time describing the processes and reactions but 
never actually gives the formula for carrying out the transmutations most of 
his work was aimed at gathering alchemical knowledge that had existed before 
him especially as regarded the philosophers stone through the high middle ages 
one three zero zero one five zero zero alchemists were much like flamel they 
concentrated on looking for the philosophers stone and the elixir of youth now 
believed to be separate things their cryptic allusions and symbolism led to 
wide variations in interpretation of the art for example many alchemists during 
this period interpreted the purification of the soul to mean the transmutation 
of lead into gold in which they believed elemental mercury or quicksilver 
played a crucial role these men were viewed as magicians and sorcerers by many 
and were often persecuted for their practices one of these men who emerged at 
the beginning of the sixteenth century was named heinrich cornelius agrippa 
this alchemist believed himself to be a wizard and actually thought himself 
capable of summoning spirits his influence was negligible but like flamel he 
produced writings which were referred to by alchemists of later years again 
like flamel he did much to change alchemy from a mystical philosophy to an 
occultist magic he did keep alive the philosophies of the earlier alchemists 
including experimental science numerology etc but he added magic theory which 
reinforced the idea of alchemy as an occultist belief in spite of all this 
agrippa still considered himself a christian though his views often came into 
conflict with the church alchemy in the modern age and renaissance european 
alchemy continued in this way through the dawning of the renaissance the era 
also saw a flourishing of con artists who would use chemical tricks and sleight 
of hand to demonstrate the transmutation of common metals into gold or claim to 
possess secret knowledge that with a small initial investment would surely lead 
to that goal the most important name in this period is philippus aureolus 
paracelsus theophrastus bombastus von hohenheim one four nine three one five 
four one who cast alchemy into a new form rejecting some of the occultism that 
had accumulated over the years and promoting the use of observations and 
experiments to learn about the human body he rejected gnostic traditions but 
kept much of the hermetical neo platonic and pythagorean philosophies however 
hermetical science had so much aristotelian theory that his rejection of 
gnosticism was practically meaningless in particular paracelsus rejected the 
magic theories of agrippa and flamel he did not think of himself as a magician 
and scorned those who did williams p two three nine four five paracelsus 
pioneered the use of chemicals and minerals in medicine and wrote many have 
said of alchemy that it is for the making of gold and silver for me such is not 
the aim but to consider only what virtue and power may lie in medicines his 
hermetical views were that sickness and health in the body relied on the 
harmony of man the microcosm and nature the macrocosm he took an approach 
different from those before him using this analogy not in the manner of soul 
purification but in the manner that humans must have certain balances of 
minerals in their bodies and that certain illnesses of the body had chemical 
remedies that could cure them while his attempts of treating diseases with such 
remedies as mercury might seem ill advised from a modern point of view his 
basic idea of chemically produced medicines has stood time surprisingly well 
alchemik micha s dziw j oil on board by jan matejko seven three x one three 
zero cm museum of arts in d in england the topic of alchemy in that time frame 
is often associated with doctor john dee one three july one five two seven 
december one six zero eight better known for his role as astrologer 
cryptographer and general scientific consultant to queen elizabeth i dee was 
considered an authority on the works of roger bacon and was interested enough 
in alchemy to write a book on that subject monas hieroglyphica one five six 
four influenced by the kabbala dee s associate edward kelley who claimed to 
converse with angels through a crystal ball and to own a powder that would turn 
mercury into gold may have been the source of the popular image of the 
alchemist charlatan another lesser known alchemist was michael sendivogius 
micha s dziw j one five six six one six three six a polish alchemist 
philosopher medical doctor and pioneer of chemistry according to some accounts 
he distilled oxygen in a lab sometime around one six zero zero one seven zero 
years before scheele and priestley by warming nitre saltpetre he thought of the 
gas given off as the elixir of life shortly after discovering this method it is 
believed that sendivogious taught his technique to cornelius drebbel in one six 
two one drebbel practically applied this in a submarine tycho brahe one five 
four six one six zero one better known for his astronomical and astrological 
investigations was also an alchemist he had a laboratory built for that purpose 
at his uraniborg observatory research institute the decline of western alchemy 
the demise of western alchemy was brought about by the rise of modern science 
with its emphasis on rigorous quantitative experimentation and its disdain for 
ancient wisdom although the seeds of these events were planted as early as the 
one seven th century alchemy still flourished for some two hundred years and in 
fact may have reached its apogee in the one eight th century robert boyle one 
six two seven one six nine one better known for his studies of gases cf boyle s 
law pioneered the scientific method in chemical investigations he assumed 
nothing in his experiments and compiled every piece of relevant data in a 
typical experiment boyle would note the place in which the experiment was 
carried out the wind characteristics the position of the sun and moon and the 
barometer reading all just in case they proved to be relevant this approach 
eventually led to the founding of modern chemistry in the one eight th and one 
nine th centuries based on revolutionary discoveries of lavoisier and john 
dalton which finally provided a logical quantitative and reliable framework for 
understanding matter transmutations and revealed the futility of longstanding 
alchemical goals such as the philospher s stone meanwhile paracelsian alchemy 
led to the development of modern medicine experimentalists gradually uncovered 
the workings of the human body such as blood circulation harvey one six one six 
and eventually traced many diseases to infections with germs koch and pasteur 
one nine th century or lack of natural nutrients and vitamins lind eijkman funk 
et al supported by parallel developments in organic chemistry the new science 
easily displaced alchemy from its medical roles interpretive and prescriptive 
while deflating its hopes of miraculous elixirs and exposing the 
ineffectiveness or even toxicity of its remedies thus as science steadily 
continued to uncover and rationalize the clockwork of the universe founded on 
its own materialistic metaphysics alchemy was left deprived of its chemical and 
medical connections but still incurably burdened by them reduced to an arcane 
philosophical system poorly connected to the material world it suffered the 
common fate of other esoteric disciplines such as astrology and kabbalah 
excluded from university curricula shunned by its former patrons ostracized by 
scientists and commonly viewed as the epitome of charlatanism and superstition 
these developments could be interpreted as part of a broader reaction in 
european intellectualism against the romantic movement of the preceding century 
be as it may it is sobering to observe how a discipline that held so much 
intellectual and material prestige for more than two thousand years could 
disappear so easily from the universe of western thought modern alchemy in 
modern times progress has been made toward achieving the goals of alchemy using 
scientific rather than alchemic means these developments may on occasion be 
called alchemy for rhetorical reasons in one nine one nine ernest rutherford 
used artificial disintegration to convert nitrogen into oxygen this process of 
bombarding the atomic nucleus with high energy particles is the principle 
behind modern particle accelerators in which transmutations of elements are 
common indeed in one nine eight zero glenn seaborg transmuted lead into gold 
though the amount of energy used and the microscopic quantities created negated 
any possible financial benefit in one nine six four george ohsawa and michio 
kushi based on the claims of louis kervran reportedly successfully transmutated 
sodium into potassium by use of an electric arc and later of carbon and oxygen 
into iron in one nine nine four r sundaresan and j bockris reported that they 
had observed fusion reactions in electrical discharges between carbon rods 
immersed in water however none of these claims have been replicated by other 
scientists and the idea is now thoroughly discredited as of two zero zero six a 
universal panacea remains elusive though futurists such as ray kurzweil believe 
sufficiently advanced nanotechnology may prolong life indefinitely some say the 
third goal of alchemy has been fulfilled by ivf and the cloning of a human 
embryo although these technologies fall far short of creating a human life from 
scratch the aim of artificial intelligence research could be said to be 
creating a life from scratch and those philosophically opposed to the 
possibility of ai have compared it with alchemy such as herbert and stuart 
dreyfus in their one nine six zero paper alchemy and ai alchemy in art and 
entertainment references to alchemy in art and entertainment are far too 
numerous to list here we give only a few indicative samples more titles can be 
found in the philosopher s stone article novels and plays many writers 
lampooned alchemists and used them as the butt of satirical attacks two early 
and well known examples are geoffrey chaucer canon s yeoman s tale ca one three 
eight zero the main character an alchemist on the way to canterbury claims that 
he will pave it all of silver and of gold ben jonson the alchemist ca one six 
one zero in this five act play the characters set up an alchemy workshop to 
swindle people an alchemical laboratory from the story of alchemy and the 
beginnings of chemistry in more recent works alchemists are generally presented 
in a more romatic or mystic light and often little distinction is made between 
alchemy magic and witchcraft mary shelley frankenstein one eight one eight 
victor frankenstein uses both alchemy and modern science to create frankenstein 
s monster goethe faust part two one eight three two faust s servant wagner uses 
alchemy to create a homunculus gabriel garc a m rquez one hundred years of 
solitude one nine six seven an alchemist named melqu ades adds to the novel s 
surreal atmosphere paulo coelho the alchemist one nine eight eight j k rowling 
harry potter and the philosopher s stone one nine nine seven features nicholas 
flamel as a character neal stephenson the baroque cycle two zero zero three two 
zero zero four features real and imaginary alchemists such as isaac newton de 
duillier and enoch root martin booth doctor illuminatus the alchemist s son two 
zero zero three margaret mahy alchemy two zero zero four john fasman the 
geographer s library whose plot revolves around thirteen alchemical artifacts 
gregory keyes age of unreason features isaac newton and de duillier cornelia 
funke dragon rider two zero zero four twigleg the homonculus was created by an 
alchemist comics manga and video games stan lee and jack kirby fantastic four 
comics ca one nine six two villain diablo is an alchemist darklands pc game one 
nine nine two alchemy features prominently throughout the game mike mignola s 
hellboy comics one nine nine three the character roger the homunculus was 
created by alchemy nintendo s golden sun video game two zero zero one alchemy 
is an evil force that threatens the world hiromu arakawa fullmetal alchemist 
two zero zero two alchemists can transform anything within the principle of 
equivalent exchange nobuhiro watsuki weapon alchemist manga two zero zero three 
kazuki takahashi yu gi oh gx anime two zero zero four the character daitokuji 
is an alchemist who preserved his soul within a homunculus nintendo s final 
fantasy tactics advance video game two zero zero three has a playable class 
called alchemist bethesda softworks the elder scrolls iii morrowind prominently 
features alchemy as a method of creating various potions for use by the player 
indiana jones and the emperor s tomb computer game two zero zero three a large 
portion of the game is centered around a castle in prague formerly owned by an 
alchemist king world of warcraft computer game two zero zero four alchemy is 
one of the professions the player can learn music tool band album lateralus two 
zero zero one references trans rex warner trans william stoddart cavendish 
richard the black arts perigee books six th ed trans richard dales two nd ed 
see also other alchemical pages vulcan of the alchemists philosopher s stone 
hermeticism astrology and alchemy transmutation duality the four humours 
alkahest arcanum berith elixir quintessence alembic alchemical symbol gold 
water related and alternative philosophies western mystery tradition astrology 
necromancy magic esotericism rosicrucianism illuminati taoism and the five 
elements kayaku jutsu acupuncture moxibustion ayurveda homeopathy anthroposophy 
psychology and carl jung new age scientific connections chemistry physics 
scientific method protoscience pseudoscience and anti science obsolete 
scientific theories historicism substances of the alchemists gold silver lead 
copper zinc mercury phosphorus sulfur arsenic antimony vitriol cinnabar pyrites 
orpiment galena magnesia lime potash natron saltpetre kohl ammonia ammonium 
chloride alcohol camphor acids sulfuric muriatic nitric acetic formic citric 
tartaric aqua regia gunpowder other resources list of alchemists list of 
occultists external links some websites discussing the original notion of 
alchemical transmutation for research in archetypal symbolism a pictorial and 
written archive of mythological ritualistic and symbolic images from all over 
the world and from all epochs of human history dictionary of the history of 
ideas alchemy skeptical chemists from alchemy to chemistry tracing the 
contributions of paracelsus the alchemy museum in kutna hora world s first 
museum dedicated to alchemy in all its aspects a one six th century lab in a 
two one st century lab analytical study of the archaeological remains of an 
alchemical laboratory the story of alchemy and the beginnings of chemistry one 
nine one three from project gutenberg the alchemy website a collection of many 
alchemical texts and other alchemical information some websites which appear to 
espouse modern versions of alchemy rex research robert nelson alchemical taoism 
com eases study of the complex healing tao qi gong chi kung system essays by 
experienced students and instructors alchemy ancient egypt arabic words 
esoteric schools of thought gold history of ideas obsolete scientific theories 
automatic dependent surveillance broadcast also called ads b is a system by 
which airplanes constantly broadcast their current position and altitude 
category of aircraft airspeed identification and whether the aircraft is 
turning climbing or descending over a dedicated radio datalink this 
functionality is known as ads b out and is the basic level of ads b 
functionality the ads b system was developed in the one nine nine zero s it 
relies on data from the global positioning system or any navigation system that 
provides an equivalent or better service the maximum range of the system is 
line of sight typically less than two zero zero nautical miles three seven zero 
km the ads b transmissions are received by air traffic control stations and all 
other ads b equipped aircraft within reception range reception by aircraft of 
ads b data is known as ads b in usage the initial use of ads b is expected to 
be by air traffic control and for surveillance purposes and for enhancing pilot 
situational awareness ads b is lower cost than conventional radar and permits 
higher quality surveillance of airborne and surface movements ads b is 
effective in remote areas or in mountainous terrain where there is no radar 
coverage or where radar coverage is limited the outback of australia is one 
such area where ads b will provide surveillance where previously none existed 
ads b also enhances surveillance on the airport surface so it can also be used 
to monitor traffic on the taxiways and runways of an airport ads b equipped 
aircraft may also have a display unit in the cockpit picturing surrounding air 
traffic from ads b data ads b in and tis b traffic information service 
broadcast data derived from air traffic radar both pilots and air traffic 
controllers will then be able to see the positions of air traffic in the 
vicinity of the aircraft and this may be used to provide an asas airborne 
separation assurance system airborne collision avoidance systems may in the 
future also make use of ads b in supplementing the existing tcas collision 
avoidance system by what is called hybrid surveillance airbus and boeing are 
now expected to include ads b out i e the transmitter of information as 
standard on new build aircraft from two zero zero five onwards this is in part 
due to the european requirements for mode s elementary surveillance which uses 
one zero nine zero mhz mode s transponder which now is normally capable of ads 
b via extended squitter and some common functionality with ads b out addressed 
and broadcast ads the radio technical commission for aeronautics rtca free 
flight selection committee defines surveillance as detection tracking 
characterization and observation of aircraft other vehicles and weather 
phenomena for the purpose of conducting flight operations in a safe and 
efficient manner automatic dependent surveillance ads is described as the 
process of creating and sending a message including the sender s current 
position and other surveillance information such as velocity intent and flight 
identification this information supports aircraft separation management by 
improving surveillance information at increased ranges situational awareness 
and decision making ads data can be used in cooperation with data from current 
radar beacon systems such as air traffic control radar beacon systems atcrbs 
mode s traffic collision avoidance systems tcas and primary air traffic control 
atc radar and may also be used as a sole means of surveillance there are two 
commonly recognized types of ads for aircraft applications ads addressed ads a 
also known as ads contract ads c and ads broadcast ads b ads a provides a 
surveillance data report that is sent to a specific addressee for example ads a 
reports are employed in the future air navigation system fans using the 
aircraft communication addressing and reporting system acars as the 
communication protocol during transoceanic flight reports are periodically sent 
by an aircraft to the controlling air traffic region when ads b is used 
aircraft and other vehicles continuously broadcast a message including position 
heading velocity and intent other uses may include obstacles transmitting a 
position message aircraft ground based stations and other users monitoring the 
channels can receive the information and use it in a wide variety of 
applications because of this potential for broad utilization a system using ads 
b is most often discussed as a replacement for or an augmentation to current 
methods of monitoring aeronautical traffic to understand the full capability of 
ads b consider how the current air traffic control system creates information 
the radar measures the range and bearing of an aircraft bearing is measured by 
the position of the rotating radar antenna when it receives a response to its 
interrogation from the aircraft and range is measured by the time it takes for 
the radar to receive the interrogation response the antenna beam becomes wider 
as the aircraft get farther away making the position information less accurate 
additionally detecting changes in aircraft velocity requires several radar 
sweeps that are spaced several seconds apart in contrast a system using ads b 
creates and listens for periodic position and intent reports from aircraft 
these reports are generated and distributed using precise instruments such as 
the global positioning system gps and mode s transponders meaning integrity of 
the data is no longer susceptible to the range of the aircraft or the length of 
time between radar sweeps the enhanced accuracy of the information will be used 
to improve safety support a wide variety of applications and increase airport 
and airspace capacity use of ads b for ground based surveillance requires only 
ads b out transmit capability on the aircraft with the addition of ads b in 
receive capability the potential for ads b applications grows significantly 
some of the equipment and services associated with ads b in capability include 
cockpit display of traffic information cdti a display of proximate traffic 
based on ads b reports from other aircraft and ground based facilities traffic 
information services broadcast tis b a ground based uplink report of proximate 
traffic that is under surveillance by atc but is not ads b equipped this 
service would be available even with limited ads b implementation flight 
information services broadcast fis b a ground based uplink of flight 
information services and weather data ads b physical layer three link solutions 
are being proposed as the physical layer for relaying the ads b position 
reports one zero nine zero mhz mode s extended squitter es universal access 
transceiver uat and vhf digital link vdl mode four mode s the faa has announced 
its selection of the one zero nine zero mhz es and uat as the mediums for the 
ads b system in the united states one zero nine zero mhz es will be the primary 
medium for air carrier and high performance commercial aircraft while uat will 
be the primary medium for general aviation aircraft europe has also chosen one 
zero nine zero mhz as the primary physical layer for ads b however the second 
medium has not yet been selected between uat and vdl mode four with one zero 
nine zero es the existing mode s transponder or a stand alone one zero nine 
zero mhz transmitter supports a message type known as the es message it is a 
periodic message that provides position velocity heading time and in the future 
intent the basic es does not offer intent since current flight management 
systems do not provide such data called trajectory change points to enable an 
aircraft to send an extended squitter message the transponder is modified and 
aircraft position and other status information is routed to the transponder atc 
ground stations and tcas equipped aircraft already have the necessary one zero 
nine zero mhz receivers to receive these signals and would only require 
enhancements to accept and process the additional information one zero nine 
zero es will not support fis b due to regulatory requirements universal access 
transceiver the uat system is specifically designed for ads b operation a one 
mhz channel in the nine zero zero mhz frequency range is dedicated for 
transmission of airborne ads b reports and for broadcast of ground based 
aeronautical information uat users would have access to the additional ground 
based aeronautical data and would receive reports from proximate traffic fis b 
and tis b vdl mode four the vdl mode four system could utilize one or more of 
the existing aeronautical vhf frequencies as the radio frequency physical layer 
for ads b transmissions vdl mode four uses a protocol stdma that allows it to 
be self organizing meaning no master ground station is required this medium is 
best used for short message transmissions from a large number of users vdl mode 
four systems are capable of increased range in comparison to l band mode s one 
zero nine zero mhz or uat systems implementation timetable the timetable for 
airborne ads b equipage will be determined by ground and airborne facility 
implementation equipment cost perceived benefits of equipping and regulatory 
actions by the civil aviation authorities caa the cost to equip with ads b out 
capability is relatively small and would benefit the airspace by enabling 
increased situational awareness ads b in capability can provide additional 
benefits when ground stations and the critical mass of aircraft are also 
equipped this data was taken into consideration when building the following 
estimated implementation timetable near term implementation two zero zero six 
two zero zero eight the next three years will see a continuation of ads b 
trials and some implementation in pockets where limited aircraft equipage can 
bring operational benefits some of these include capstone in alaska the faa is 
conducting its capstone program to improve surveillance in some of the more 
remote locations of alaska and as a test bed for implementing elements of ads b 
into the atc environment approximately one nine zero general aviation users 
have been equipped with gps receivers uat transceivers and flight deck displays 
in addition one one ground based transceivers have been installed for radar 
like services and flight information services data fis b including weather 
information is being uplinked from the ground phase ii of the program will 
expand the coverage and add more than two five zero additional users gulf of 
mexico in the gulf of mexico where atc radar coverage is incomplete the faa is 
locating ads b one zero nine zero mhz receivers on oil rigs and buoys to relay 
information received from aircraft equipped with ads b extended squitters back 
to the atc centers to expand and improve surveillance coverage australia 
australia is implementing ads b trials in queensland to test the feasibility of 
one zero nine zero mhz ads b as an alternative to ground based radar ads b is 
expected to be a much more cost effective method of providing atc surveillance 
coverage for remote areas which currently have limited or no surveillance 
coverage cargo airline association cargo carriers operating at their hub 
airports operate largely at night equipage of these aircraft with ads b and 
cdti displays along with a ground based transceiver at these hubs will allow 
better situational awareness at night and in inclement weather and offers the 
potential for increased airport traffic handling capability embry riddle 
aeronautical university embry riddle aeronautical university is equipping the 
training aircraft at its two main campuses in florida and arizona with ads b 
capability as a safety enhancement the faa will provide fis b and tis b uplink 
capabilities in those areas in support of this equipage safe flight two one 
east coast broadcast services the faa has announced its intention to implement 
ads b coverage for the entire east coast of the u s by the end of two zero zero 
four service range will extend inland one five zero miles with a goal of 
providing coverage at altitudes down to two zero zero zero feet the medium will 
be uat and the implementation will also include tis b and fis b information mid 
term implementation two zero zero eight two zero one two within four to eight 
years an increasing number of aircraft with ads b out capability along with the 
start of ground based ads b infrastructure will begin to make a number of ads b 
applications attractive benefits of pockets of implementation will become 
evident and these areas will be expanded encouraging more users to equip with 
ads b capability beginning in two zero zero four the faa is expected to deploy 
ads b ground infrastructure based on asde x equipment this infrastructure will 
allow the use of ads b data for atc purposes such as surface movement tracking 
guidance and airborne surveillance ground uplinks of tis b and fis b will 
commence where the ground infrastructure is deployed other civil aviation 
authorities may install ads b ground infrastructure and require aircraft to be 
equipped with ads b out for operation in selected airspace australia is 
expected to be the first country to do so however a number of other countries 
with limited surveillance coverage may find ads b an attractive alternative to 
radar surveillance significant numbers of users will become equipped with a 
minimum of ads b out capability in europe one zero nine zero mhz es will become 
standard capability for all new mode s transponder installations after three 
one march two zero zero five uat will become increasingly popular in the upper 
end of the general aviation market airport situational awareness a combination 
of detailed airport maps airport multilateration asde x systems enhanced 
aircraft displays and ads b have the potential to significantly improve runway 
situational awareness oceanic in trail ads b can provide enhanced situational 
awareness and safety for oceanic in trail maneuvers as additional aircraft 
become equipped use of ads b and cdti will allow decreased approach spacing and 
closely spaced parallel approaches at congested airports with improved safety 
and capacity during low lower visibility operations long term implementations 
two zero one two and beyond air carriers fleets will achieve intended ads b 
benefits in the terminal and en route airspace new aircraft separation 
assurance applications will take advantage of the increased situational 
awareness and positional accuracy available in an airspace environment largely 
equipped with ads b capability fis b and tis b services will encourage general 
aviation equipage in all market segments references see also do two one two 
minimal operational performance standards for airborne automatic dependent 
surveillance ads equipment external links airservices australia ads b info safe 
flight two one ads b projects capstone ads b project nup ii project ads medup 
project eurocontrol cascade programme european organisation for civil aviation 
equipment us crunches the numbers before committing to ads b jane s airport 
review avionics the republic of austria german republik sterreich is a 
landlocked country in central europe it borders germany and the czech republic 
to the north slovakia and hungary to the east slovenia and italy to the south 
and switzerland and liechtenstein to the west the capital is the city of vienna 
austria is a parliamentary representative democracy consisting of nine federal 
states and is one of two european countries that have declared their 
everlasting neutrality the other being switzerland austria is a member of the 
united nations since one nine five five and the european union since one nine 
nine five for the first half of two zero zero six austria holds the seat of the 
presidency of the eu origin and history of the name the german name sterreich 
can be translated into english as the eastern realm which is derived from the 
old german ostarr chi reich can also mean empire and this connotation is the 
one that is understood in the context of the austrian austro hungarian empire 
holy roman empire although not in the context of the modern republic of 
sterreich the term probably originates in a vernacular translation of the 
medieval latin name for the region marchia orientalis which translates as 
eastern border as it was situated at the eastern edge of the holy roman empire 
that was also mirrored in the name ostmark applied after anschluss to germany 
history austria and the holy roman empire the territory of austria originally 
known as the celtic kingdom of noricum was a long time ally of rome it was 
occupied rather than conquered by the romans during the reign of augustus and 
made the province noricum in one six bc later it was conquered by huns rugii 
lombards ostrogoths bavarii avars until c eight zero zero and franks in that 
order finally after four eight years of hungarian rule nine zero seven to nine 
five five the core territory of austria was awarded to leopold of babenberg in 
nine seven six being part of the holy roman empire the babenbergs ruled and 
expanded austria from the one zero th century to the one three th century 
battle of vienna one six eight three after duke frederick ii died in one two 
four six and left no successor rudolf i of habsburg gave the lands to his sons 
marking the beginning of the line of the habsburgs who continued to govern 
austria until the two zero th century with the short exception of charles vii 
albert of bavaria austrian habsburgs held the position of german emperor 
beginning in one four three eight with albert ii of habsburg until the end of 
the holy roman empire during the one four th and one five th century austria 
continued to expand its territory until it reached the position of a european 
imperial power at the end of the one five th century until the end of the 
habsburg monarchy in one nine one eight modern history just two years before 
the abolition of the holy roman empire in one eight zero six in one eight zero 
four the empire of austria was founded which was transformed in one eight six 
seven into the dual monarchy austria hungary the empire was split into several 
independent states in one nine one eight after the defeat of the central powers 
in world war i with most of the german speaking parts becoming a republic see 
treaty of saint germain between one nine one eight and one nine one nine it was 
officially known as the republic of german austria republik deutsch sterreich 
after the entente powers forbade german austria to unite with germany they also 
forbade the name and then it was changed to simply republic of austria the 
democratic republic lasted until one nine three three when the chancellor 
engelbert dollfu established an autocratic regime oriented towards italian 
fascism austrofascism austria became part of germany in one nine three eight 
through the anschlu and remained under nazi rule until the end of world war ii 
after the defeat of the axis powers the allies occupied austria until one nine 
five five when the country became a fully independent republic under the 
condition that it would remain neutral see austrian state treaty austria also 
became a member of the un in the same year after the collapse of communist 
states in eastern europe austria became increasingly involved in european 
affairs and in one nine nine five austria joined the european union and the 
euro monetary system in one nine nine nine politics austrian parliament in 
vienna austria became a federal parliamentarian democratic republic through the 
federal constitution of one nine two zero it was reintroduced in one nine four 
five to the nine states of the federal republic the head of state is the 
federal president who is directly elected the chairman of the federal 
government is the federal chancellor who is appointed by the president the 
government can be removed from office by either a presidential decree or by 
vote of no confidence in the lower chamber of parliament the nationalrat the 
parliament of austria consists of two chambers the composition of the 
nationalrat is determined every four years by a free general election in which 
every citizen is allowed to vote to fill its one eight three seats a four 
percent hurdle prevents a large splintering of the political landscape in the 
nationalrat by awarding seats only to political parties that have obtained at 
least a four percent threshold of the general vote or alternatively have won a 
direct seat or direktmandat in one of the four three regional election 
districts the nationalrat is the dominant chamber in the formation of 
legislation in austria however the upper house of parliament the bundesrat has 
a limited right of veto the nationalrat can in most cases pass the respective 
bill a second time bypassing the bundesrat altogether a convention called the 
sterreich konvent was convened in june three zero two zero zero three to decide 
upon suggestions to reform the constitution but has failed to produce a 
proposal that would receive the two thirds of votes in the nationalrat 
necessary for constitutional amendments and or reform however some important 
parts of the final report were generally agreed upon and are still expected to 
be implemented subdivisions a federal republic austria is divided into nine 
states german bundesl nder these states are divided into districts bezirke and 
cities statutarst dte districts are subdivided into municipalities gemeinden 
cities have the competencies otherwise granted to both districts and 
municipalities the states are not mere administrative divisions but have some 
distinct legislative authority separate from the federal government states of 
austria geography topography of austria austria is a largely mountainous 
country due to its location in the alps the central eastern alps northern 
limestone alps and southern limestone alps are all partly in austria of the 
total area of austria eight four zero zero zero km or three two zero zero zero 
sq mi only about a quarter can be considered low lying and only three two of 
the country is below five zero zero metres one six four zero ft the high 
mountainous alps in the west of austria flatten somewhat into low lands and 
plains in the east of the country map of austria austria may be divided into 
five different areas the biggest area are the austrian alps which constitute 
six two of austria s total area the austrian foothills at the base of the alps 
and the carpathians account for around one two of its area the foothills in the 
east and areas surrounding the periphery of the pannoni low country amount to 
about one two of the total landmass the second greater mountain area much lower 
than the alps is situated in the north known as the austrian granite plateau it 
is located in the central area of the bohemian mass and accounts for one zero 
of austria the austrian portion of the viennese basin comprises the remaining 
four climate the greater part of austria lies in the cool temperate climate 
zone in which humid westerly winds predominate with over half of the country 
dominated by the alps the alpine climate is the predominant one in the east the 
climate shows continental features with less rain than the areas with high 
rainfall averages the six highest mountains in austria are economy the 
belvedere palace an example of the baroque austria has a well developed social 
market economy and a high standard of living until the one nine eight zero s 
many of austria s largest industry firms were nationalised however in recent 
years privatisation has reduced state holdings to a level comparable to other 
european economies labour movements are particularly strong in austria and have 
large influence on labour politics germany has historically been the main 
trading partner of austria making it vulnerable to rapid changes in the german 
economy slow growth in germany and elsewhere in the world affected austria 
slowing its growth to one two in two zero zero one but since austria became a 
member state of the european union it has gained closer ties to other european 
union economies reducing its economic dependence on germany in addition 
membership in the eu has drawn an influx of foreign investors attracted by 
austria s access to the single european market and proximity to eu aspiring 
economies therefore estimates of growth in two zero zero five up to two are 
much more favourable than in the crippling german economy agriculture austrian 
farms like those of other west european mountainous countries are small and 
fragmented and production is relatively expensive industry although some 
industries such as several iron and steel works and chemical plants are large 
industrial enterprises employing thousands of people most industrial and 
commercial enterprises in austria are relatively small on an international 
scale services like in other western countries the biggest contributor to 
austria s gdp is its service sector most notably is tourism especially winter 
tourism to meet increased competition from both eu and central european 
countries austria will need to emphasize knowledge based sectors of the economy 
continue to deregulate the service sector and lower its tax burden see also 
list of austrian companies demographics vienna during the first half of the one 
eight th century painting by canaletto austria s capital vienna is one of 
europe s major cities with a population exceeding one six million two million 
with suburbs and constitutes a melting pot of citizens from all over central 
and eastern europe in contrast to this metropolis other cities do not exceed 
one million inhabitants in fact the second largest city graz is home of three 
zero five zero zero zero people followed by linz with one eight zero zero zero 
zero salzburg with one four five zero zero zero and innsbruck with one three 
four eight zero three two zero zero five all other cities have fewer than one 
zero zero zero zero zero inhabitants austrians of german mother tongue by far 
the country s largest group form nine one one of austria s population the 
remaining number of austria s people are of non austrian descent many from 
surrounding countries especially from the former east bloc nations the austrian 
federal states of carinthia and styria are home to a significant indigenous 
slovenian minority with around one four zero zero zero members austrian census 
unofficial numbers of slovene groups speak of about four zero zero zero zero so 
called guest workers gastarbeiter and their descendants also form an important 
minority group in austria around two zero zero zero zero hungarians and three 
zero zero zero zero croatians live in the east most bundesland burgenland 
formerly part of hungary the official language german is spoken by almost all 
residents of the country austria s mountainous terrain led to the development 
of many distinct german dialects all of the dialects in the country however 
belong to austro bavarian groups of german dialects with the exception of the 
dialect spoken in its west most bundesland vorarlberg which belongs to the 
group of alemannic dialects there is also a distinct grammatical standard for 
austrian german with a few differences to the german spoken in germany politics 
concerning ethnic groups volksgruppenpolitik an estimated two five zero zero 
zero four zero zero zero zero slovenians in the austrian state of carinthia as 
well as croatians and hungarians in burgenland were recognized as a minority 
and have enjoyed special rights following the austrian state treaty 
staatsvertrag of one nine five five the slovenians in the austrian state of 
styria estimated at a number between one six zero zero and five zero zero zero 
are not recognized as a minority and do not enjoy special rights although the 
state treaty of july two seven one nine five five states otherwise the right 
for bilingual topographic signs for the regions where slovene and croatian 
speaking austrians live alongside with the german speaking population as 
required by the one nine five five state treaty is still to be fully 
implemented there is also an undercurrent of thinking amongst parts of the 
carenthian population that the slovenian involvement in the partisan war 
against the nazi occupation force was a bad thing and indeed tito partisan is a 
not an infrequent insult hurled against members of the minority many 
carinthians are afraid of slovenian territorial claims pointing to the fact 
that yugoslav troops entered the state after each of the two world wars and 
considering that some official slovenian atlases still show parts of carinthia 
as slovenian cultural territory the current governor j rg haider has made this 
fact a matter of public argument in fall two zero zero five by refusing to 
increase the number of bilingual topographic signs in carinthia a poll by the k 
rntner humaninstitut conducted in january two zero zero six states that six 
five of carinthians are not in favour of an increase of bilingual topographic 
signs since the original requirements set by the state treaty of one nine five 
five have already been fulfilled according to their point of view another 
interesting phenomenon is the so called windischen theorie stating that the 
slovenians can be split in two groups actual slovenians and windische based on 
differences in language between austrian slovenians who were taught slovenian 
standard language in school and those slovenians who spoke their local 
slovenian dialect but went to german schools to the latter group the term 
windische originally the german word for slovenians was applied claiming that 
they were a different ethnic group this theory was never generally accepted and 
has been ultimately rejected several decades ago list of cities in austria 
religion charles v austrian habsburg ruler and one of the major figures within 
the counter reformation while northern and central germany was the origin of 
the reformation austria and bavaria were the heart of the counter reformation 
in the one six th and one seven th century when the absolute monarchy of 
habsburg imposed a strict regime to maintain catholicism s power and influence 
among austrians despite this establishment of catholicism as the predominant 
christian religion protestants have throughout austria s history remained a 
relatively small group austria s history as a multinational state has made it 
necessary for habsburg rulers to deal with a heterogeneous religious population 
religious freedom was declared a constitutional right as early as one eight six 
seven and austria hungary was home of numerous religions beside roman 
catholicism such as greek serbian romanian russian and bulgarian orthodox 
christians jews muslims austria neighboured the ottoman empire for centuries 
mormons and both calvinists and lutheran protestants still austria remained 
largely influenced by catholicism after one nine one eight first republic 
catholic leaders such as theodor innitzer and ignaz seipel took leading 
positions within or close to the austrian government and increased their 
influence during the time of the austrofascism catholicism was treated much 
like a state religion by dictators engelbert dollfuss and kurt schuschnigg 
although catholic leaders welcomed the germans in one nine three eight during 
the anschluss of austria into germany austrian catholicism stopped its support 
of nazism later on and many former religious public figures became involved 
with the resistance during the third reich after one nine four five a stricter 
secularism was imposed in austria and religious influence on politics has 
nearly vanished as of the end of the two zero th century about seven three of 
austria s population are registered as roman catholic while about five consider 
themselves protestants both these numbers have been on the decline for decades 
especially roman catholicism which has suffered an increasing number of 
seceders of the church this is due partly to child sexual abuse scandals by 
priests as well as the alleged unwillingness of the roman catholic church to 
implement reforms in addition austrian catholics are obliged to pay a mandatory 
tax calculated by income ca one to the austrian roman catholic church which 
acts as another incentive to leave the church about one two of the population 
declare that they do not belong to any church or religious community of the 
remaining people about one eight zero zero zero zero are members of the eastern 
orthodox church and about seven three zero zero are jewish it has to be noted 
that the austrian jewish community of one nine three eight vienna alone counted 
more than two zero zero zero zero zero of which solely four zero zero zero to 
five zero zero zero remained after the second world war the influx of eastern 
europeans especially from the former yugoslav nations albania and particularly 
from turkey largely contributed to a substantial muslim minority in austria 
around three zero zero zero zero zero are registered as members of various 
muslim communities the numbers of people adhering to the islam has increased 
largely during the last years and is expected to grow in the future buddhism 
which was legally recognized as a religion in austria in one nine eight three 
enjoys widespread acceptance and has a following of two zero zero zero zero one 
zero four zero two at the two zero zero one census a two zero zero five survey 
among eight zero zero zero people in various european countries showed that 
austrians are still among the countries with the strongest belief in god eight 
four of all austrians do state they believe in god with only poland nine seven 
portugal nine zero and russia eight seven in front of the countries surveyed 
this is a much larger figure than the european average of seven one or germany 
with six seven culture ludwig wittgenstein although austria is a small country 
its history as a world power and its unique cultural environment in the heart 
of europe have generated contributions to mankind in every possible field one 
might argue that austria is internationally best known for its musicians it has 
been the birthplace of many famous composers such as wolfgang amadeus mozart 
joseph haydn franz schubert anton bruckner johann strauss sr johann strauss jr 
or gustav mahler as well as members of the second viennese school such as 
arnold schoenberg anton webern or alban berg complementing its status as a land 
of artists austria has always been a country of great poets writers and 
novelists it was the home of novelists arthur schnitzler stefan zweig thomas 
bernhard or robert musil of poets georg trakl franz werfel franz grillparzer 
rainer maria rilke or adalbert stifter famous contemporary playwrights and 
novelists are elfriede jelinek and peter handke among austrian artists and 
architects one can find painters gustav klimt oskar kokoschka egon schiele or 
friedensreich hundertwasser photographer inge morath or architect otto wagner 
austria was the cradle of numerous scientists including physicists ludwig 
boltzmann lise meitner erwin schr dinger ernst mach wolfgang pauli richard von 
mises and christian doppler philosophers ludwig wittgenstein and karl popper 
biologists gregor mendel and konrad lorenz as well as mathematician kurt g del 
it was home to psychologists sigmund freud alfred adler paul watzlawick and 
hans asperger psychiatrist viktor frankl economists joseph schumpeter eugen von 
b hm bawerk ludwig von mises and friedrich hayek austrian school and peter 
drucker and engineers such as ferdinand porsche and siegfried marcus although 
austrians can look back with pride on their cultural past current austria does 
not stand back in art and science austria hosts a tremendous amount of culture 
with its classical music festivals in vienna salzburg and bregenz its modern 
artists and writers its theatres and opera houses list of austrians music of 
austria miscellaneous topics austrian folk dancing austrian german 
communications in austria cuisine of austria education in austria foreign 
relations of austria media in austria military of austria public holidays in 
austria spanish riding school stamps and postal history of austria tourism in 
austria transportation in austria references references and bibliography can be 
found in the more detailed articles linked to in this article external links 
the aeiou encyclopedia homepage table of contents search amateur radio in 
austria answers com article on austria austria in pictures austria info 
official homepage of the austrian national tourist office german english and 
other languages austrian cultural forum new york cultural meeting place in 
manhattan austrian recipes on cookbookwiki com austrosearch bilingual austrian 
search engine and directory german english bundeskanzleramt sterreich federal 
chancellor of austria website of the federal chancellery of austria german 
english cia gov cia s factbook on austria dwellan com tourism in austria 
library of congress portals on the world austria peter diem the symbols of 
austria photoglobe info country studies austria info radio orf austrian radio 
stations both classical and modern music live feed tiscover at austria travel 
guide us department of state facts and information updated february two zero 
zero five austrian airlines austria erasmus prize winners landlocked countries 
the commonwealth of australia is a country in the southern hemisphere 
comprising the world s smallest continent and a number of islands in the 
southern indian and pacific oceans australia s neighbouring countries include 
indonesia east timor and papua new guinea to the north the solomon islands 
vanuatu and the french dependency of new caledonia to the northeast and new 
zealand to the southeast the continent of australia has been inhabited for over 
four zero zero zero zero years by indigenous australians after sporadic visits 
by fishermen from the north and by european explorers and merchants starting in 
the one seven th century the eastern half of the continent was claimed by the 
british in one seven seven zero and officially settled as the penal colony of 
new south wales on two six january one seven eight eight as the population grew 
and new areas were explored another five largely self governing british crown 
colonies were successively established over the course of the one nine th 
century on one january one nine zero one the six colonies federated and the 
commonwealth of australia was formed since federation australia has maintained 
a stable liberal democratic political system and remains a commonwealth realm 
the current population of around two zero four million is concentrated mainly 
in the large coastal cities of sydney melbourne brisbane perth and adelaide 
origin and history of the name the name australia is derived from the latin 
australis meaning southern legends of an unknown southern land terra australis 
incognita date back to the roman times and were commonplace in mediaeval 
geography but they were not based on any actual knowledge of the continent the 
dutch adjectival form australische australian in the sense of southern was used 
by dutch officials in batavia to refer to the newly discovered land to the 
south as early as one six three eight the first use of the word australia in 
english was a one six nine three translation of les aventures de jacques sadeur 
dans la d couverte et le voyage de la terre australe a one six nine two french 
novel by gabriel de foigny under the pen name jacques sadeur alexander 
dalrymple then used it in an historical collection of voyages and discoveries 
in the south pacific ocean published in one seven seven one he used the term to 
refer to the entire south pacific region not specifically to the australian 
continent in one seven nine three george shaw and sir james smith published 
zoology and botany of new holland in which they wrote of the vast island or 
rather continent of australia australasia or new holland view of port jackson 
taken from the south head from a voyage to terra australis sydney was 
established on this site the name australia was popularised by the one eight 
one four work a voyage to terra australis by the navigator matthew flinders 
despite its title which reflected the view of the admiralty flinders used the 
word australia in the book which was widely read and gave the term general 
currency governor lachlan macquarie of new south wales subsequently used the 
word in his dispatches to england in one eight one seven he recommended that it 
be officially adopted in one eight two four the british admiralty agreed that 
the continent should be known officially as australia the word australia in 
australian english is pronounced as either or history the first human 
habitation of australia is estimated to have occurred between four two zero 
zero zero and four eight zero zero zero years ago the first australians were 
the ancestors of the current indigenous australians they arrived via land 
bridges and short sea crossings from present day southeast asia most of these 
people were hunter gatherers with a complex oral culture and spiritual values 
based on reverence for the land and a belief in the dreamtime the torres strait 
islanders ethnically melanesian inhabited the torres strait islands and parts 
of far north queensland they possess distinct cultural practices from the 
aborigines lieutenant james cook charted the east coast of australia on hm bark 
endeavour claiming the land for britain in one seven seven zero this replica 
was built in fremantle in one nine eight eight for australia s bicentenary the 
first undisputed recorded european sighting of the australian continent was 
made by the dutch navigator willem jansz who sighted the coast of cape york 
peninsula in one six zero six during the one seven th century the dutch charted 
the whole of the western and northern coastlines of what they called new 
holland but made no attempt at settlement in one seven seven zero james cook 
sailed along and mapped the east coast of australia which he named new south 
wales and claimed for britain the expedition s discoveries provided impetus for 
the establishment of a penal colony there following the loss of the american 
colonies that had previously filled that role port arthur tasmania was 
australia s largest penal colony the british crown colony of new south wales 
started with the establishment of a settlement at port jackson by captain 
arthur phillip on two six january one seven eight eight this date was later to 
become australia s national day australia day van diemen s land now known as 
tasmania was settled in one eight zero three and became a separate colony in 
one eight two five the united kingdom formally claimed the western part of 
australia in one eight two nine separate colonies were created from parts of 
new south wales south australia in one eight three six victoria in one eight 
five one and queensland in one eight five nine the northern territory nt was 
founded in one eight six three as part of the province of south australia 
victoria and south australia were founded as free colonies that is they were 
never penal colonies although the former did receive some convicts from 
tasmania western australia was also founded free but later accepted transported 
convicts due to an acute labour shortage the transportation of convicts to 
australia was phased out between one eight four zero and one eight six eight 
the indigenous australian population estimated at about three five zero zero 
zero zero at the time of european settlement declined steeply for one five zero 
years following settlement mainly due to infectious disease forced migration 
the removal of children and other colonial government policies that some 
historians and indigenous australians have argued could be considered 
tantamount to genocide by today s understanding such interpretations of 
aboriginal history are disputed by some as being exaggerated or fabricated for 
political or ideological reasons this debate is known within australia as the 
history wars following the one nine six seven referendum the federal government 
gained the power to implement policies and make laws with respect to aborigines 
traditional ownership of land native title was not recognised until the high 
court case mabo v queensland no two overturned the notion of australia as terra 
nullius at the time of european occupation the last post is played at an anzac 
day ceremony in port melbourne victoria two five april two zero zero five 
ceremonies such as this are held in virtually every suburb and town in 
australia a gold rush began in australia in the early one eight five zero s and 
the eureka stockade rebellion in one eight five four was an early expression of 
nationalist sentiment between one eight five five and one eight nine zero the 
six colonies individually gained responsible government managing most of their 
own affairs while remaining part of the british empire the colonial office in 
london retained control of some matters notably foreign affairs defence and 
international shipping on one january one nine zero one federation of the 
colonies was achieved after a decade of planning consultation and voting and 
the commonwealth of australia was born as a dominion of the british empire the 
australian capital territory act was formed from new south wales in one nine 
one one to provide a location for the proposed new federal capital of canberra 
melbourne was the capital from one nine zero one to one nine two seven the 
northern territory was transferred from the control of the south australian 
government to the commonwealth in one nine one one australia willingly 
participated in world war i many australians regard the defeat of the 
australian and new zealand army corps anzacs at gallipoli as the birth of the 
nation its first major military action the gallipoli campaign is often 
erroneously portrayed as or conceived to have been a solely or mainly anzac 
campaign the reality was that british deaths during the campaign were twice as 
high as those of anzac forces much like gallipoli the kokoda track campaign is 
regarded by many as a nation defining battle from world war ii the statute of 
westminster one nine three one formally ended most of the constitutional links 
between australia and the united kingdom but australia did not adopt the 
statute until one nine four two the shock of the united kingdom s defeat in 
asia in one nine four two and the threat of japanese invasion caused australia 
to turn to the united states as a new ally and protector since one nine five 
one australia has been a formal military ally of the us under the auspices of 
the anzus treaty after world war ii australia encouraged mass immigration from 
europe since the one nine seven zero s and the abolition of the white australia 
policy immigration from asia and other parts of the world was also encouraged 
as a result australia s demography culture and image of itself were radically 
transformed the final constitutional ties between australia and the united 
kingdom ended in one nine eight six with the passing of the australia act one 
nine eight six ending any british role in the australian states and ending 
judicial appeals to the uk privy council australian voters rejected a move to 
become a republic in one nine nine nine by a five five majority but the result 
is generally viewed in terms of dissatisfaction with the specifics of the 
proposed republican model rather than attachment to the monarchy since the 
election of the whitlam government in one nine seven two there has been an 
increasing focus on the nation s future as a part of the asia pacific region 
politics new parliament house in canberra was opened in one nine eight eight 
replacing the provisional parliament house building opened in one nine two 
seven the commonwealth of australia is a constitutional monarchy and has a 
parliamentary system of government queen elizabeth ii is the queen of australia 
a role that is distinct from her position as elizabeth ii of the united kingdom 
the queen is nominally represented by the governor general although the 
constitution gives extensive executive powers to the governor general these are 
normally exercised only on the advice of the prime minister the most notable 
exercise of the governor general s reserve powers outside the prime minister s 
direction was the dismissal of the whitlam government in the constitutional 
crisis of one nine seven five there are three branches of government the 
legislature the commonwealth parliament comprising the queen the senate and the 
house of representatives the queen is represented by the governor general who 
in practice exercises little or no power over the parliament the executive the 
federal executive council the governor general as advised by the executive 
councillors in practice the councillors are the prime minister and ministers of 
state whose advice the governor general accepts with rare exceptions the 
judiciary the high court of australia and other federal courts the state courts 
became formally independent from the judicial committee of the privy council 
when the australia act was passed in one nine eight six the bicameral 
commonwealth parliament consists of the queen the senate the upper house of 
seven six senators and a house of representatives the lower house of one five 
zero members members of the lower house are elected from single member 
constituencies commonly known as electorates or seats seats in the house of 
representatives are allocated to states on the basis of population in the 
senate each state regardless of population is represented by one two senators 
with the act and the nt each electing two elections for both chambers are held 
every three years typically only half of the senate seats are put to each 
election because senators have overlapping six year terms the party with 
majority support in the house of representatives forms government with its 
leader becoming prime minister there are three major political parties the 
labor party the liberal party and the national party independent members and 
several minor parties including the greens family first and the australian 
democrats have achieved representation in australian parliaments mostly in 
upper houses although their influence has been marginal since the one nine nine 
six election the liberal national coalition led by the prime minister john 
howard has been in power in canberra in the two zero zero four election the 
coalition won control of the senate the first time that a party or coalition of 
governing parties has done so while in government in more than two zero years 
the labor party is in power in every state and territory voting is compulsory 
in each state and territory and at the federal level states and territories 
states and territories of australia australia consists of six states two major 
mainland territories and other minor territories the states are new south wales 
queensland south australia tasmania victoria and western australia the two 
major mainland territories are the northern territory and the australian 
capital territory in most respects the territories function similarly to the 
states but the commonwealth parliament can override any legislation of their 
parliaments by contrast federal legislation overrides state legislation only 
with respect to certain areas as set out in section five one of the 
constitution all residual legislative powers are retained by the state 
parliaments including powers over hospitals education police the judiciary 
roads public transport and local government each state and territory has its 
own legislature unicameral in the case of the northern territory the act and 
queensland and bicameral in the remaining states the lower house is known as 
the legislative assembly house of assembly in south australia and tasmania and 
the upper house the legislative council the heads of the governments in each 
state and territory are called premiers and chief ministers respectively the 
queen is represented in each state by a governor an administrator in the 
northern territory and the governor general in the act have analogous roles 
australia also has several minor territories the federal government administers 
a separate area within new south wales the jervis bay territory as a naval base 
and sea port for the national capital in addition australia has the following 
inhabited external territories norfolk island christmas island cocos keeling 
islands and several largely uninhabited external territories ashmore and 
cartier islands coral sea islands heard island and mcdonald islands and the 
australian antarctic territory foreign relations and military over recent 
decades australia s foreign relations have been driven by a close association 
with the united states through the anzus pact and by a desire to develop 
relationships with asia and the pacific particularly through asean and the 
pacific islands forum in two zero zero five australia secured an inaugural seat 
at the east asia summit following its accession to the treaty of amity and 
cooperation australia is a member of the commonwealth of nations in which the 
commonwealth heads of government meetings provide the main forum for co 
operation much of australia s diplomatic energy is focused on international 
trade liberalisation australia led the formation of the cairns group and apec 
and is a member of the oecd and the wto australia has pursued several major 
bilateral free trade agreements most recently the australia us free trade 
agreement australia is a founding member of the united nations and maintains an 
international aid program under which some six zero countries receive 
assistance the two zero zero five zero six budget provides a two five bn for 
development assistance as a percentage of gdp this contribution is less than 
that of the un millennium development goals australia s armed forces the 
australian defence force adf comprise the royal australian navy ran the 
australian army and the royal australian air force raaf all branches of the adf 
have been involved in un and regional peacekeeping most recently in east timor 
the solomon islands and sudan disaster relief and armed conflict including the 
two zero zero three invasion of iraq the government appoints the chief of the 
defence force from one of the armed services the current chief is air chief 
marshal angus houston in two zero zero five zero six the defence budget is a 
one seven five bn geography climate map of australia australia s seven six 
eight six eight five zero square kilometres two nine six seven nine zero nine 
sq mi landmass is on the indo australian plate surrounded by the indian 
southern and pacific oceans australia is separated from asia by the arafura and 
timor seas australia has a total two five seven six zero kilometres one six 
zero zero seven mi of coastline and claims an extensive exclusive economic zone 
of eight one four eight two five zero square kilometres three one four six zero 
five seven sq mi this exclusive economic zone does not include the australian 
antarctic territory the great barrier reef the world s largest coral reef lies 
a short distance off the north east coast and extends for over two zero zero 
zero kilometres one two five zero mi the world s two largest monoliths are 
located in australia mount augustus in western australia is the largest and 
uluru in central australia is the second largest at two two two eight metres 
seven three one zero ft mount kosciuszko on the great dividing range is the 
highest mountain on the australian mainland although mawson peak on the remote 
australian territory of heard island is taller at two seven four five metres 
nine zero zero six ft climate the largest part of australia is desert or semi 
arid four zero of the landmass is covered by sand dunes only the south east and 
south west corners have a temperate climate and moderately fertile soil the 
northern part of the country has a tropical climate part is tropical 
rainforests part grasslands and very little desert australia receives snowfall 
in some cities but mostly in towns and at higher evaluations climate is highly 
influenced by ocean currents including the el ni o southern oscillation which 
is correlated with periodic drought and the seasonal tropical low pressure 
system that produces cyclones in northern australia rainfall is highly variable 
with frequent droughts rising levels of salinity and desertification in some 
areas australia is situated in the middle of the tectonic plate and therefore 
has no active volcanism only extinct volcanos although it may sometimes receive 
minor earthquakes the terrain is mostly heavily weathered low plateau with 
deserts rangelands and a fertile plain in southeast tasmania and the australian 
alps do not contain any permanent icefields or glaciers although they may have 
existed in the past the great barrier reef by far the world s largest coral 
reef lies a short distance off the north east coast mount augustus in western 
australia is the largest monolith in the world flora and fauna the koala and 
the eucalyptus make an iconic pair of australian flora and fauna although most 
of australia is semi arid or desert it covers a diverse range of habitats from 
alpine heaths to tropical rainforests because of the great age and consequent 
low levels of fertility of the continent its extremely variable weather 
patterns and its long term geographic isolation much of australia s biota is 
unique and diverse about eight five of flowering plants eight four of mammals 
more than four five of birds and eight nine of in shore temperate zone fish are 
endemic many of australia s ecoregions and the species within those regions are 
threatened by human activities and introduced plant and animal species the 
federal environment protection and biodiversity conservation act one nine nine 
nine is a legal framework used for the protection of threatened species 
numerous protected areas have been created to protect and preserve australia s 
unique ecosystems six four wetlands are registered under the ramsar convention 
and one six world heritage sites have been established australia was ranked one 
three th in the world on the two zero zero five environmental sustainability 
index most australian plant species are evergreen and many are adapted to fire 
and drought including the eucalyptus and acacias australia has a rich variety 
of endemic legume species that thrive in nutrient poor soils because of their 
symbiosis with rhizobia bacteria and mycorrhizal fungi well known australian 
fauna include monotremes the platypus and echidna a host of marsupials 
including the koala kangaroo wombat and birds such as the emu cockatoo and 
kookaburra the dingo was introduced by austronesian people that traded with 
indigenous australians around four zero zero zero bce many plant and animal 
species became extinct soon after human settlement including the australian 
megafauna many more have become extinct since european settlement among them 
the thylacine tasmanian tiger economy melbourne s population is approximately 
three seven million the second largest in australia australia has a prosperous 
western style mixed economy with a per capita gdp slightly higher than those of 
the uk germany and france the country was ranked third in the united nations 
two zero zero five human development index and sixth in the economist worldwide 
quality of life index two zero zero five in recent years the australian economy 
has been resilient in the face of global economic downturn rising output in the 
domestic economy has been offsetting the global slump and business and consumer 
confidence remains robust australia s emphasis on economic reform is often 
claimed to be key factor behind the economy s strength in the one nine eight 
zero s the labor party led by prime minister bob hawke and treasurer paul 
keating started the process of economic reform by floating the australian 
dollar in one nine eight three and deregulating the financial system since one 
nine nine six the howard government has continued the process of micro economic 
reform including the partial deregulation of the labour market and the 
privatisation of state owned businesses most notably in the telecommunications 
industry substantial reform of the indirect tax system was implemented in july 
two zero zero zero with the introduction of a one zero goods and services tax 
which has slightly reduced the heavy reliance on personal and company income 
tax that still characterises australia s tax system the australian economy has 
not suffered a recession since the early one nine nine zero s as of january two 
zero zero six unemployment was five three with one zero zero three four five 
zero zero persons employed the service sector of the economy including tourism 
education and financial services comprises six nine of gdp agriculture and 
natural resources represent only three and five of gdp respectively but 
contribute substantially to australia s export performance australia s largest 
export markets include japan china the united states south korea and new 
zealand areas of concern to some economists include the chronically high 
current account deficit and also high levels of net foreign debt demographics 
most australians live in urban areas sydney is the most populous city in 
australia most of the estimated two zero four million australians are descended 
from one nine th and two zero th century immigrants the majority from great 
britain and ireland australia s population has quadrupled since the end of 
world war i spurred by an ambitious immigration program in two zero zero one 
the five largest groups of the two seven four of australians who were born 
overseas were from the united kingdom new zealand italy vietnam and china 
following the abolition of the white australia policy in one nine seven three 
numerous government initiatives have been established to encourage and promote 
racial harmony based on a policy of multiculturalism australia s population has 
increased by about six zero times since european settlement the self declared 
indigenous population including torres strait islanders who are of melanesian 
descent was four one zero zero zero three two two of the total population in 
two zero zero one a significant increase from the one nine seven seven census 
which showed an indigenous population of one one five nine five three 
indigenous australians have higher rates of imprisonment and unemployment lower 
levels of education and life expectancies for males and females that are one 
seven years lower than those of other australians perceived racial inequality 
is an ongoing political and human rights issue for australians fewer than one 
five of australians live in rural areas this picture shows the barossa valley 
wine producing region of south australia in common with many other developed 
countries australia is experiencing a demographic shift towards an older 
population with more retirees and fewer people of working age a large number of 
australians seven five nine eight four nine for the period two zero zero two 
zero three live outside their home country australia has maintained one of the 
most active immigration programs in the world to boost population growth most 
immigrants are skilled the quota includes categories for family members and 
refugees english is the official language and is spoken and written in a 
distinct variety known as australian english according to the two zero zero one 
census english is the only language spoken in the home for around eight zero of 
the population the next most common languages spoken at home are chinese two 
one italian one nine and greek one four a considerable proportion of first and 
second generation migrants are bilingual it is believed that there were between 
two zero zero and three zero zero australian aboriginal languages at the time 
of first european contact only about seven zero of these languages have 
survived and all but two zero of these are now endangered an indigenous 
language remains the main language for about five zero zero zero zero zero zero 
two people australia has a sign language known as auslan which is the main 
language of about six five zero zero deaf people australia has no state 
religion the two zero zero one census identified that six eight of australians 
call themselves christian two seven identifying themselves as roman catholic 
and two one as anglican australians that identify themselves as followers of 
non christian religions number five a total of one six were categorised as 
having no religion which includes non theistic beliefs such as humanism atheism 
agnosticism and rationalism and a further one two declined to answer or did not 
give a response adequate for interpretation as in many western countries the 
level of active participation in church worship is much lower than this weekly 
attendance at church services is about one five million about seven five of the 
population school attendance is compulsory throughout australia between the 
ages of six one five years one six years in south australia and tasmania 
contributing to an adult literacy rate that is assumed to be nine nine 
government grants have supported the establishment of australia s three eight 
universities and although several private universities have been established 
the majority receive government funding there is a state based system of 
vocational training colleges known as tafe institutes and many trades conduct 
apprenticeships for training new tradespeople approximately five eight of 
australians between the ages of two five and six four have vocational or 
tertiary qualifications culture golden summer eaglemont eaglemont victoria by 
arthur streeton one eight eight nine is an early example of the rich tradition 
of australian landscape painting the primary basis of australian culture up 
until the mid two zero th century was anglo celtic although distinctive 
australian features had been evolving from the environment and indigenous 
culture over the past five zero years australian culture has been strongly 
influenced by american popular culture particularly television and cinema large 
scale immigration from non english speaking countries and australia s asian 
neighbours the vigour and originality of the arts in australia films opera 
music painting theater dance and crafts are achieving international recognition 
australia has a long history of visual arts starting with the cave and bark 
paintings of its indigenous peoples from the time of european settlement a 
common theme in australian art has been the australian landscape seen in the 
works of arthur streeton arthur boyd and albert namatjira among others the 
traditions of indigenous australians are largely transmitted orally and are 
closely tied to ceremony and the telling of the stories of the dreamtime 
australian aboriginal music dance and art have a palpable influence on 
contemporary australian visual and performing arts australia has an active 
tradition of music ballet and theatre many of its performing arts companies 
receive public funding through the federal government s australia council there 
is a symphony orchestra in each capital city and a national opera company opera 
australia first made prominent by the renowned diva dame joan sutherland 
australian music includes classical jazz and many popular music genres 
australian literature has also been influenced by the landscape the works of 
writers such as banjo paterson and henry lawson captured the experience of the 
australian bush the character of colonial australia as embodied in early 
literature resonates with modern australia and its perceived emphasis on 
egalitarianism mateship and anti authoritarianism in one nine seven three 
patrick white was awarded the nobel prize in literature the only australian to 
have achieved this he is recognised as one of the great english language 
writers of the two zero th century australian english is a major variety of the 
language its grammar and spelling are largely based on those of british english 
overlaid with a rich vernacular of unique lexical items and phrases some of 
which have found their way into standard english australia has two public 
broadcasters the abc and sbs three commercial television networks three pay tv 
services and numerous public non profit television and radio stations australia 
s film industry has achieved critical and commercial successes each major city 
has daily newspapers and there are two national daily newspapers the australian 
and the australian financial review according to reporters without borders in 
two zero zero five australia is in three one st position on a list of countries 
ranked by press freedom behind new zealand nine th and the united kingdom two 
eight th but ahead of the united states this ranking is primarily due to the 
limited diversity of commercial media ownership in australia most australian 
print media in particular is under the control of either news corporation or 
john fairfax holdings australian rules football was developed in melbourne 
australia and is played at amateur and professional levels sport is an 
important part of australian culture assisted by a climate that favours outdoor 
activities two three five australians over the age of one five regularly 
participate in organised sporting activities at an international level 
australia has particularly strong teams in cricket hockey netball rugby league 
rugby union and performs well in cycling and swimming australia has 
participated in every summer olympic games of the modern era and every 
commonwealth games australia has hosted the one nine five six and two zero zero 
zero summer olympics and has ranked among the top five medal takers since two 
zero zero zero in two zero zero four it collected four nine olympic medals one 
seven gold one six silver and one six bronze australia has also hosted the one 
nine three eight one nine six two and one nine eight two commonwealth games and 
will host the two zero zero six commonwealth games in melbourne australian 
rules football is the most popular national sport players gain some 
international prominence through international rules which is an annual meeting 
between the australian code and irish gaelic football however rugby league is 
more popular than australian rules in new south wales and queensland the 
australian open is one of the four grand slam tennis tournaments held in 
melbourne each january the f one australian grand prix is also held in 
melbourne usually towards the end of march each year corporate and government 
sponsorship of many sports and lite athletes is common in australia televised 
sport is popular some of the highest rating television programs include the 
summer olympic games and the grand finals of local and international football 
competitions see also references sidney j baker the australian language second 
edition one nine six six gillespie r two zero zero two dating the first 
australians radiocarbon four four four five five four seven two smith l one 
nine eight zero the aboriginal population of australia australian national 
university press canberra tatz c one nine nine nine genocide in australia 
aiatsis research discussion papers no eight australian institute of aboriginal 
and torres strait islander studies canberra windschuttle k two zero zero one 
the fabrication of aboriginal history the new criterion vol two zero no one 
september two zero sheehan p two zero zero two our history not rewritten but 
put right the sydney morning herald november two five bean c ed one nine four 
one volume i the story of anzac the first phase first world war official 
histories one one th edition australian electoral commission two zero zero zero 
one nine nine nine referendum reports and statistics parliamentary library one 
nine nine seven the reserve powers of the governor general australian 
government two zero zero five budget two zero zero five two zero zero six 
department of the environment and heritage about biodiversity macfarlane i j 
one nine nine eight australian monetary policy in the last quarter of the 
twentieth century reserve bank of australia bulletin october parham d two zero 
zero two microeconomic reforms and the revival in australia s growth in 
productivity and living standards conference of economists adelaide one october 
australian bureau of statistics labour force australia cat six two zero two 
australian bureau of statistics year book australia two zero zero five 
department of foreign affairs and trade two zero zero three advancing the 
national interest appenidix one australian bureau of statistics population 
growth australia s population growth department of immigration multicultural 
and indigenous affiars two zero zero five the evolution of australia s 
multicultural policy australian bureau of statistics two zero zero one census a 
snapshot of australia parliament of australia senate two zero zero five inquiry 
into australian expatriates department of immigration multicultural and 
indigenous affiars one nine nine five pluralist nations pluralist language 
policies ncls releases latest estimates of church attendance national church 
life survey media release two eight february two zero zero four australian film 
commission what are australians watching free to air one nine nine nine two 
zero zero four tv external links wikitravel guide to australia australian 
government entry portal commonwealth government online department of 
immigration and multicultural and indigenous affairs dimia department of 
foreign affairs and trade dfat country information satellite images of 
australia google maps national library of australia national museum of 
australia official australia tourism website bureau of meteorology official 
website of the melbourne two zero zero six commonwealth games australia 
continents members of the commonwealth of nations monarchies one nine zero one 
establishments align center style vertical align top colspan two national motto 
samoa muamua le atua samoa let god be first align center colspan two style 
background ffffff image locationamericansamoa png official languages samoan 
english capital fagatogo constitutional and de facto seat of government 
executive offices are located in utulei governor togiola tulafono area total 
water ranked two two six th one nine nine km seven six eight sq mi zero 
population total two zero zero three density ranked two zero three rd seven 
zero two six zero three five three km nine one four sq mi currency usd time 
zone utc one one no dst national anthem amerika samoa internet tld as calling 
code one six eight four style background efefef align center colspan two image 
fatu rock jpgfatu rock right and futi rock left islets on the reef of tutuila 
at the entrance to pago pago harbor seen behind fatu american samoa samoan 
amerika samoa is an unorganized unincorporated territory of the united states 
located in the south pacific ocean southeast of the sovereign state of samoa 
the main largest and most populous island is tutuila with the islands rose 
atoll and swains island also included in the territory american samoa is part 
of the samoan islands chain located west of the cook islands north of tonga and 
some three zero zero miles five zero zero km south of tokelau to the west are 
the islands of the wallis and futuna group history main article history of 
samoa history of american samoa originally inhabited as early as one zero zero 
zero bc samoa was not reached by european explorers until the one eight th 
century international rivalries in the latter half of the one nine th century 
were settled by an one eight nine nine treaty of berlin in which germany and 
the u s divided the samoan archipelago the u s formally occupied its portion a 
smaller group of eastern islands with the noted harbor of pago pago the 
following year the western islands are now the independent state of samoa after 
the u s took possession of american samoa the u s navy built a coaling station 
on pago pago bay for its pacific squadron and appointed a local secretary the 
navy secured a deed of cession of tutuila in one nine zero zero and a deed of 
cession of in one nine zero four the last sovereign of the was forced to sign a 
deed of cession of following a series of us naval trials known as the trial of 
the ipu in pago pago and aboard a pacific squadron gunboat during world war ii 
u s marines in american samoa outnumbered the local population having a huge 
cultural influence after the war organic act four five zero zero a u s 
department of interior sponsored attempt to incorporate american samoa was 
defeated in congress primarily through the efforts of american samoan chiefs 
led by tuiasosopo mariota these chiefs efforts led to the creation of a local 
legislature the american samoa fono which meets in the village of fagatogo the 
territory s de facto and de jure capital see the trivia section below for more 
information on fagatogo in time the navy appointed governor was replaced by a 
locally elected one although technically considered unorganized in that the u s 
congress has not passed an organic act for the territory american samoa is self 
governing under a constitution that became effective on july one one nine six 
seven the u s territory of american samoa is on the united nations list of non 
self governing territories a listing which is disputed by territorial 
government officials administrative divisions american samoa is 
administratively divided into three districts and two unorganized islands these 
districts are subdivided into seven three villages districts eastern western 
manu a unorganized islands rose island swains island map of the districts of 
american samoa the villages for eastern and western districts are aasu afao 
afono agugulu alao alofau aloga amaluia amanave amaua amouli anua aoa aoloau 
asili atu u aua auasi aumi aunu u auto avaio faga alu faga itau fagaili i 
fagamalo faganeanea fagasa fagatogo failolo falenin fatumafuti futiga ili ili 
leloaloa leone leuli i malaeimi malaeloa aitulagi malaeloa ituau maloata 
mapusagafou masausi masefau matu u mesespa nu uuli nua onenoa pago pago pava ia 
i poloa sa ilele se etaga tafuna taputimu tula utulei utumea east utumea west 
vailoatai vaitogi vatia map of the villages of american samoa map of the 
villages of the manua districts and swain s atoll the villages for the manu a 
district are faleasao leusoali i luma maia ofu olosega si ufaga sili there is 
one village on swains island rose island is an uninhabited wildlife refuge 
trivia american samoa is the location of rose atoll the southernmost point in 
the united states if insular areas and territories are included see extreme 
points for more information about three zero ethnic samoans many from american 
samoa currently play in the national football league a two zero zero two 
article from espn estimated that a samoan male either an american samoan or a 
samoan living in the five zero united states is four zero times more likely to 
play in the nfl than a non samoan american a number have also ventured into 
professional wrestling see especially persons born in american samoa are united 
states nationals but not united states citizens this is the only circumstance 
under which an individual would be one and not the other the american samoa 
national soccer team holds an unwanted world record in international soccer the 
record defeat in an international match a three one zero crushing by australia 
on april one one two zero zero one although many respected reference sources 
list the neighboring village of pago pago as the capital fagatogo is the de 
facto and de jure i e constitutionally designated cf article five section nine 
seat of government additionally the governor s office is located in the village 
of utulei located on the opposite side of fagatogo from pago pago the reason 
why many sources list pago pago is because the name pago pago the most popular 
port of call in american samoa has become associated with the harbor itself 
thus pago pago is now generally applied to the harbor area and the capital 
however both the port itself and the legislature of american samoa known as the 
fono are located in fagatogo a village that is adjacent to and for all 
practical purposes indistinguishable from pago pago cf wikipedia entry for pago 
pago in march of one eight eight nine a german naval force shelled a village in 
samoa and by doing so destroyed some american property three american warships 
then entered the samoan harbor and were prepared to fire on the three german 
warships found there before guns were fired a hurricane blew up and sank all 
the ships american and german a compulsory armistice was called because of the 
lack of warships see also scouting in american samoa government list of 
american samoa governors elections in american samoa sports american samoa at 
the two zero zero zero summer olympics american samoa national rugby league 
team american samoa national soccer team cia factbook data from the cia world 
factbook two zero zero zero geography of american samoa demographics of 
american samoa politics of american samoa economy of american samoa 
communications in american samoa transportation in american samoa military 
defense is the responsibility of the us external links cia the world factbook 
american samoa cia s factbook on american samoa the passive resistance of 
samoans to us and other colonialisms article in sovereignty matters ed joanne 
barker university of nebraska press two zero zero five history of american 
samoa essay which looks at the history of the territory from ancient to more 
modern times jane s american samoa page library of congress portals of the 
world american samoa library of congress resource which provides links to 
resources on american samoa map of american samoa map showing the basic layout 
of american samoa revised constitution of american samoa provides the text of 
the constition of american samoa the official webpage of the american samoa 
government lists information on the territorial government including officials 
and recent legislation united nations decolonization papers online united 
nations decolonization documents including current and past working papers on 
american samoa choohoo an online community for samoans features include forums 
chat blogs etc rulers org american samoa list of rulers for american samoa 
american samoa insular areas of the united states oceanic dependencies alien or 
aliens may mean extraterrestrial life in scientific context extraterrestrial 
life in culture alien film one nine seven nine by ridley scott aliens one nine 
eight six film the sequel to the above film xenomorph the alien creatures from 
the alien movies aliens comic a group of comic book series alien biology a non 
native species alien computing a program that converts between different linux 
package distribution file formats alien law a person who is neither a native 
nor a citizen of their country of residence alien signifier use in literature 
and criticism as the embodiment of an outside perspective or the sense of the 
other the aliens roky erickson s backing band alien game a one nine eight two 
dos text adventure an astronomer or astrophysicist is a person whose area of 
interest is astronomy or astrophysics johannes hevelius was famed for his work 
on sunspots and being the first to study the surface of the moon astronomy is 
generally thought to have begun in ancient babylon by the persian zoroastrian 
priests the magi recent studies of babylonian records have shown them to be 
extremely accurate for the ancient night sky following the babylonians the 
egyptians also had an emphasis on observations of the sky mixtures of religious 
interpretations of the sky and the development of complex models for applying 
these interpretations led to a duality that we now identify as astrology it is 
important to recognize that before about one seven five zero there was no 
distinction between astrology and astronomy astronomers unlike most scientists 
cannot interact with the objects that they study they instead must resort to 
detailed observation in order to make discoveries generally astronomers use 
telescopes or other imaging equipment to make such observations the job itself 
is involved with travel to remote locations to study as well famous astronomers 
see also amateur astronomy list of astronomers there is also a well known 
painting by johannes vermeer titled the astronomer which is often linked to 
vermeer s the geographer these paintings are both thought to represent the 
growing influence and rise in prominence of scientific inquiry in europe at the 
time of their painting one six six eight six nine astronomers science 
occupations amoeba chaos diffluens foraminiferan ammonia tepida heliozoan 
actinophrys sol amoeboids are cells that move or feed by means of temporary 
projections called pseudopods false feet they have appeared in a number of 
different groups some cells in multicellular animals may be amoeboid for 
instance our white blood cells which consume pathogens many protists exist as 
individual amoeboid cells or take such a form at some point in their life cycle 
the most famous such organism is amoeba proteus the name amoebae is variously 
used to describe its close relatives other organisms similar to it or the 
amoeboids in general amoeboids may be divided into several morphological 
categories based on the form and structure of the pseudopods those where the 
pseudopods are supported by regular arrays of microtubules are called 
actinopods and forms where they are not are called rhizopods further divided 
into lobse filose and reticulose amoebae there is also a strange group of giant 
marine amoeboids the xenophyophores that do not fall into any of these 
categories lobose pseudopods are blunt and there may be one or several on a 
cell which is usually divided into a layer of clear ectoplasm surrounding more 
granular endoplasm most including amoeba itself move by the body mass flowing 
into an anterior pseudopod the vast majority form a monophyletic group called 
the amoebozoa which also includes most slime moulds a second group the 
percolozoa includes protists that can transform between amoeboid and flagellate 
forms filose pseudopods are narrow and tapering the vast majority of filose 
amoebae including all those that produce shells are placed within the cercozoa 
together with various flagellates that tend to have amoeboid forms the naked 
filose amoebae comprise two other groups the vampyrellids and nucleariids the 
latter appear to be close relatives of animals and fungi reticulose pseudopods 
are cytoplasmic strands that branch and merge to form a net they are found most 
notably among the foraminifera a large group of marine protists that generally 
produce multi chambered shells there are only a few sorts of naked reticulose 
amoeboids notably the gymnophryids and their relationships are not certain 
actinopods are divided into the radiolaria and heliozoa the radiolaria are 
mostly marine protists with complex internal skeletons including central 
capsules that divide the cells into granular endoplasm and frothy ectoplasm 
that keeps them buoyant the heliozoa include both freshwater and marine forms 
that use their axopods to capture small prey and only have simple scales or 
spines for skeletal elements both groups appear to be polyphyletic 
traditionally the amoeboid protozoa are grouped together as the sarcodina 
variously ranked from class to phylum with each of the above categories as a 
formal subtaxon however since they are all based on form rather than phylogeny 
newer systems generally separate some out or abandon them entirely most 
amoeboids are now included in two major supergroups the amoebozoa including 
most lobose amoebae and slime moulds and the rhizaria including the cercozoa 
foraminifera radiolarian classes and certain heliozoa however amoeboids have 
appeared separately in many other groups including various different lines of 
algae not listed above external links the amoebae website brings together 
information from published sources amoebas are more than just blobs sun 
animacules and amoebas protistacell biologyamoeboidsmotile cells there are nine 
five printable ascii characters numbered three two to one two six ascii a 
merican s tandard c ode for i nformation i nterchange generally pronounced is a 
character encoding based on the english alphabet ascii codes represent text in 
computers communications equipment and other devices that work with text most 
modern character encodings have a historical basis in ascii ascii was first 
published as a standard in one nine six seven and was last updated in one nine 
eight six it currently defines codes for three three non printing mostly 
obsolete control characters that affect how text is processed plus the 
following nine five printable characters starting with the space character 
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz asteroid three five six 
eight ascii is named after the character encoding overview like other character 
representation computer codes ascii specifies a correspondence between digital 
bit patterns and the symbols glyphs of a written language thus allowing digital 
devices to communicate with each other and to process store and communicate 
character oriented information the ascii character encoding or a compatible 
extension see below is used on nearly all common computers especially personal 
computers and workstations the preferred mime name for this encoding is us 
ascii ascii is strictly a seven bit code meaning that it uses the bit patterns 
representable with seven binary digits a range of zero to one two seven decimal 
to represent character information at the time ascii was introduced many 
computers dealt with eight bit groups bytes or more specifically octets as the 
smallest unit of information the eighth bit was commonly used as a parity bit 
for error checking on communication lines or other device specific functions 
machines which did not use parity typically set the eighth bit to zero though 
some systems such as prime machines running primos set the eighth bit of ascii 
characters to one ascii only defines a relationship between specific characters 
and bit sequences aside from reserving a few control codes for line oriented 
formatting it does not define any mechanism for describing the structure or 
appearance of text within a document such concepts are within the realm of 
other systems such as the markup languages history ascii developed from 
telegraphic codes and first entered commercial use as a seven bit teleprinter 
code promoted by bell data services the bell system had previously planned to 
use a six bit code derived from fieldata that added punctuation and lower case 
letters to the earlier five bit baudot teleprinter code but was persuaded 
instead to join the asa subcommittee that had started to develop ascii baudot 
helped in the automation of sending and receiving telegraphic messages and took 
many features from morse code however unlike morse code baudot used constant 
length codes compared to earlier telegraph codes the proposed bell code and 
ascii both underwent re ordering for more convenient sorting especially 
alphabetization of lists and added features for devices other than teleprinters 
bob bemer introduced features such as the escape sequence the american 
standards association asa later to become ansi first published ascii as a 
standard in one nine six three ascii one nine six three lacked the lowercase 
letters and had an up arrow instead of the caret and a left arrow instead of 
the underscore the one nine six seven version added the lowercase letters 
changed the names of a few control characters and moved the two controls ack 
and esc from the lowercase letters area into the control codes area ascii was 
subsequently updated and published as ansi x three four one nine six eight ansi 
x three four one nine seven seven and finally ansi x three four one nine eight 
six other international standards bodies have ratified character encodings that 
are identical or nearly identical to ascii these encodings are sometimes 
referred to as ascii even though ascii is strictly defined only by the asa ansi 
standards the european computer manufacturers association published editions of 
its ascii clone ecma six in one nine six five one nine six seven one nine seven 
zero one nine seven three one nine eight three and one nine nine one the one 
nine nine one edition is the same as ansi x three four one nine eight six the 
international organization for standardization published its version iso six 
four six later iso iec six four six in one nine six seven one nine seven two 
one nine eight three and one nine nine one iso six four six one nine seven two 
in particular established a set of country specific versions with punctuation 
characters replaced with non english letters iso iec six four six one nine nine 
one international reference version is the same as ansi x three four one nine 
eight six the international telecommunication union published its version of 
ansi x three four one nine eight six itu t recommendation t five zero in one 
nine nine two in the early one nine seven zero s under the name ccitt the same 
organization published a version as ccitt recommendation v three din published 
a version of ascii as din six six zero zero three in one nine seven four the 
ietf published a version in one nine six nine as rfc two zero and established 
the internet s standard version based on ansi x three four one nine eight six 
with the publication of rfc one three four five in one nine nine two ibm s 
version of ansi x three four one nine eight six is published in ibm technical 
literature as code page three six seven ascii has also become embedded in its 
probable replacement unicode as the lowest one two eight characters some 
observers consider ascii the most successful software standard ever promulgated 
ascii control characters ascii reserves the first three two codes numbers zero 
three one decimal for control characters codes originally intended not to carry 
printable information but rather to control devices such as printers that make 
use of ascii for example character one zero represents the line feed function 
which causes a printer to advance its paper and character two seven represents 
the escape key often found in the top left corner of common keyboards code one 
two seven all seven bits on another special character equates to delete or 
rubout though its function resembles that of other control characters the 
designers of ascii used this pattern so that it could erase a section of paper 
tape a popular storage medium until the one nine eight zero s by punching all 
possible holes at a particular character position thus effectively replacing 
any previous information since code zero null all bits off was also ignored it 
was possible to leave gaps and then make corrections by blanking characters 
before or after the gap and then entering new characters in the gap many of the 
ascii control codes serve or served to mark data packets or to control a data 
transmission protocol e g enquiry effectively any stations out there 
acknowledge negative acknowledge start of header start of text end of text etc 
escape and substitute permit a communications protocol to for instance mark 
binary data so that if it contains codes with the same pattern as a protocol 
character the recipient will process the code as data the designers of ascii 
intended the separator characters record separator etc for use with magnetic 
tape systems two of the device control characters commonly interpreted as xon 
and xoff generally function as flow control characters to throttle data flow to 
a slow device such as a printer from a fast device such as a computer so data 
does not overrun and get lost early users of ascii adopted some of the control 
codes to represent meta information such as end of line start end of a data 
element and so on these assignments often conflict so part of the effort in 
converting data from one format to another involves making the correct meta 
information transformations for example the character s representing end of 
line newline in text data files streams vary from operating system to operating 
system when moving files from one system to another the conversion process must 
recognize these characters as end of line markers and handle them appropriately 
today ascii users use the control characters less and less with the exception 
of carriage return and or line feed modern markup languages modern 
communication protocols the move from text based to graphical devices and the 
demise of teleprinters punch cards and paper tapes have rendered most of the 
control characters obsolete printable representation the unicode glyphs 
reserved for representing control characters when it is necessary to print or 
display them rather than have them perform their intended function control key 
sequence the traditional key sequences for inputting control characters the 
caret represents the control or ctrl key that must be held down while pressing 
the second key in the sequence the caret key representation is also used by 
some software to represent control characters the backspace character can also 
be entered by pressing the backspace bksp or key on some systems the delete 
character can also be entered by pressing the delete or del key it can also be 
entered by pressing the backspace bksp or key on some systems the escape 
character can also be entered by pressing the escape or esc key on some systems 
the carriage return character can also be entered by pressing the return ret 
enter or key on most systems the ambiguity surrounding the backspace key comes 
from systems that translated the del control character into a bs backspace 
before transmitting it some software was unable to process the character and 
would display h instead h persists in messages today as a deliberate humorous 
device e g there s a sucker h h h h h hpotential customer born every minute a 
less common variant of this involves the use of w which in some text editors 
means delete previous word the example sentence would therefore also work as 
there s a sucker w potential customer born every minute ascii printable 
characters code three two the space character denotes the space between words 
as produced by the large space bar of a keyboard codes three three to one two 
six known as the printable characters represent letters digits punctuation 
marks and a few miscellaneous symbols seven bit ascii provided seven national 
characters and if the combined hardware and software permit can use overstrikes 
to simulate some additional international characters in such a scenario a 
backspace can precede a grave accent which the american and british standards 
but only those standards also call opening single quotation mark a tilde or a 
breath mark inverted vel zero one one one one one one zero one two six seven e 
structural features the digits zero nine are represented with their values in 
binary prefixed with zero zero one one this means that bcd ascii is simply a 
matter of taking each bcd nibble separately and prefixing zero zero one one to 
it lowercase and uppercase letters only differ in bit pattern by a single bit 
simplifying case conversion to a range test to avoid converting characters that 
are not letters and a single bitwise operation aliases for ascii rfc one three 
four five published in june one nine nine two and the iana registry of 
character sets ongoing both recognize the following case insensitive aliases 
for ascii as suitable for use on the internet ansi x three four one nine six 
eight canonical name ansi x three four one nine eight six ascii us ascii 
preferred mime name us iso six four six us iso six four six irv one nine nine 
one iso ir six ibm three six seven cp three six seven csascii of these only the 
aliases us ascii and ascii have achieved widespread use one often finds them in 
the optional charset parameter in the content type header of some mime messages 
in the equivalent meta element of some html documents and in the encoding 
declaration part of the prolog of some xml documents variants of ascii as 
computer technology spread throughout the world different standards bodies and 
corporations developed many variations of ascii in order to facilitate the 
expression of non english languages that used roman based alphabets one could 
class some of these variations as ascii extensions although some mis apply that 
term to cover all variants including those that do not preserve ascii s 
character map in the seven bit range iso six four six one nine seven two the 
first attempt to remedy the pro english language bias created compatibility 
problems since it remained a seven bit character set it made no additional 
codes available so it reassigned some in language specific variants it thus 
became impossible to know what character a code represented without knowing 
which variant to work with and text processing systems could generally cope 
with only one variant anyway eventually improved technology brought out of band 
means to represent the information formerly encoded in the eighth bit of each 
byte freeing this bit to add another one two eight additional character codes 
for new assignments for example ibm developed eight bit code pages such as code 
page four three seven which replaced the control characters with graphic 
symbols such as smiley faces and mapped additional graphic characters to the 
upper one two eight bytes operating systems such as dos supported these code 
pages and manufacturers of ibm pcs supported them in hardware eight bit 
standards such as iso iec eight eight five nine and mac os roman developed as 
true extensions of ascii leaving the original character mapping intact and just 
adding additional values above the seven bit range this enabled the 
representation of a broader range of languages but these standards continued to 
suffer from incompatibilities and limitations still iso eight eight five nine 
one its variant windows one two five two often mislabeled as iso eight eight 
five nine one and original seven bit ascii remain the most common character 
encodings in use today unicode and the iso iec one zero six four six universal 
character set ucs have a much wider array of characters and their various 
encoding forms have begun to supplant iso iec eight eight five nine and ascii 
rapidly in many environments while ascii basically uses seven bit codes unicode 
and the ucs use relatively abstract code points non negative integer numbers 
that map using different encoding forms and schemes to sequences of one or more 
eight bit bytes to permit backward compatibility unicode and the ucs assign the 
first one two eight code points to the same characters as ascii one can 
therefore think of ascii as a seven bit encoding scheme for a very small subset 
of unicode and of the ucs the popular utf eight encoding form prescribes the 
use of one to four eight bit code values for each code point character and 
equates exactly to ascii for the code values below one two eight other encoding 
forms such as utf one six resemble ascii in how they represent the first one 
two eight characters of unicode but tend to use one six or three two bits per 
character so they require conversion for compatibility the blend word 
asciibetical has evolved to describe the collation of data in ascii code order 
rather than standard alphabetical order the abbreviation asciiz or asciz refers 
to a null terminated ascii string see also ansi ascii art ascii games text file 
bob bemer ebcdic unicode ascii ribbon ascii extensions where all ascii 
printable characters are identical to ascii extended ascii utf eight iso eight 
eight five nine iscii viscii windows code pages ascii variants where some ascii 
printable characters have been replaced iso six four six atascii petscii zx 
spectrum character set references for specific points general unicode org chart 
on the ascii range tom jennings october two nine two zero zero four annotated 
history of character codes accessed december one seven two zero zero five alt 
codes external links not relevant to this page user chris chittleborough eight 
february two zero zero six a pronunciation guide for ascii characters ascii 
chart how to send documents in ascii etc online encoder decoder for ascii hex 
binary base six four etc with md two md four md five sha one two crc and other 
hashing algorithms five letter acronyms character encoding character sets latin 
alphabet representations america is usually meant as either the americas the 
lands between the atlantic and pacific oceans usually subdivided into north 
america south america the united states of america see also americas 
terminology use of the word america and use of the word american america is 
also america netherlands in limburg america a part of the parish of sutton in 
the isle in cambridgeshire england america is the title or name of 
entertainment am rica a song by spanish singer and composer jos luis perales 
america a song by simon and garfunkel america a song by prince america a song 
by neil diamond america band a rock and roll band america the title of their 
debut album america an album by the band havalina america a one nine two four 
film directed by d w griffith america the book a book written by the staff of 
the daily show with jon stewart america a book by jean baudrillard examining 
the nation sociologically america a song from west side story by leonard 
bernstein also performed by the uk rock group the nice america xm xm satellite 
radio channel one zero am rica a brazilian telenovela soap opera america 
television station an argentinian television station america a weekly roman 
catholic magazine sports club america mexican football soccer team am rica de 
cali a colombian football soccer team america a racing yacht that won the first 
ever america s cup in one eight five one transportation america a multi engine 
airplane used by richard e byrd and his crew on a one nine two seven 
transatlantic flight america a passenger liner commanded by george fried 
involved in a famous sea rescue in one nine two nine uss america the name of 
three united states navy ships ss america a passenger liner owned by the united 
states lines america is an alternative title for my country tis of thee a 
patriotic song of the united states our america an essay by jose marti see also 
amerika disambiguation naming of america a satellite composite image of africa 
africa is the world s second largest and second most populous continent after 
asia at about three zero three seven zero zero zero zero km one one seven three 
zero zero zero zero sq mi including its adjacent islands it covers five nine of 
the earth s total surface area and two zero three of the total land area with 
over eight four zero zero zero zero zero zero zero people as of two zero zero 
five in six one territories it accounts for more than one two of the world s 
human population etymology world map showing africa geographically the name 
africa came into western use through the romans who used the name africa terra 
land of the afri plural or afer singular for the northern part of the continent 
as the province of africa with its capital carthage corresponding to modern day 
tunisia the afri were a tribe possibly berber who dwelt in north africa in the 
carthage area the origin of afer may be connected with phoenician afar dust 
also found in most other semitic languages some other etymologies that have 
been postulated for the ancient name africa that are much more debatable 
include the latin word aprica meaning sunny the greek word aphrike meaning 
without cold see also list of traditional greek place names the historian leo 
africanus one four nine five one five five four attributed the origin to the 
greek word phrike meaning cold and horror combined with the negating prefix a 
so meaning a land free of cold and horror however the change of sound from ph 
to f in greek is datable to about the first century so this is unlikely to be 
the origin ancient africa extended into what is now known as asia there was no 
line drawn between the two continents until the geographer ptolemy eight five 
one six five ad accepted alexandria as prime meridian and made the isthmus of 
suez and the red sea the boundary between asia and africa as europeans came to 
understand the real extent of the continent the idea of africa expanded with 
their knowledge geography main article geography of africa africa in the blue 
marble picture with antarctica to the south and the sahara and arabian 
peninsula at the top of the globe africa is the largest of the three great 
southward projections from the main mass of the earth s surface it includes 
within its remarkably regular outline an area of c three zero three six zero 
two eight eight km one one seven two two one seven three mi including the 
islands separated from europe by the mediterranean sea it is joined to asia at 
its northeast extremity by the isthmus of suez transected by the suez canal one 
three zero km eight zero miles wide geopolitically egypt s sinai peninsula east 
of the suez canal is often considered part of africa as well from the most 
northerly point cape blanc ra s al abyad in tunisia three seven two one n to 
the most southerly point cape agulhas in south africa three four five one one 
five s is a distance approximately of eight zero zero zero km five zero zero 
zero miles from cape verde one seven three three two two w the westernmost 
point to ras hafun in somalia five one two seven five two e the most easterly 
projection is a distance also approximately of seven four zero zero km four six 
zero zero miles the length of coast line is two six zero zero zero km one six 
one zero zero miles and the absence of deep indentations of the shore is shown 
by the fact that europe which covers only nine seven zero zero zero zero zero 
km three seven six zero zero zero zero square miles has a coast line of three 
two zero zero zero km one nine eight zero zero miles the main structural lines 
of the continent show both the east to west direction characteristic at least 
in the eastern hemisphere of the more northern parts of the world and the north 
to south direction seen in the southern peninsulas africa is thus composed of 
two segments at right angles the northern running from east to west the 
southern from north to south the subordinate lines corresponding in the main to 
these two directions history main article history of africa map of africa one 
eight nine zero africa is home to the oldest inhabited territory on earth with 
the human race originating from this continent during the mid two zero th 
century anthropologists discovered many fossils and evidence of human 
occupation perhaps as early as seven million years ago fossil remains of 
several species of early ape like humans thought to have evolved into modern 
day man such as australopithecus afarensis radiometrically dated to three nine 
three zero million years bc paranthropus boisei two three one four million bc 
and homo ergaster c six zero zero zero zero zero one nine million bc has been 
discovered the ishango bone dated to c two five zero zero zero years ago shows 
tallies in mathematical notation throughout humanity s prehistory africa like 
all other continents had no nation states and was instead inhabited by groups 
of hunter gatherers such as the khoi and san formerly known as bushmen around 
three three zero zero bc the historical record opens in africa with the rise of 
literacy in egypt which continued with varying levels of influence over other 
areas until three four three bc other prominent civilizations include ethiopia 
the nubian kingdom carthage the kingdoms of the sahel ghana mali and songhai 
and great zimbabwe in one four eight two the portuguese established the first 
of many trading stations along the guinea coast at elmina the chief commodities 
dealt in were slaves gold ivory and spices the european discovery of america in 
one four nine two was followed by a great development of the slave trade which 
before the portuguese era had been an overland trade almost exclusively and 
never confined to any one continent but at the same time that slavery was 
ending in europe in the early one nine th century the european imperial powers 
staged a massive scramble for africa and occupied most of the continent 
creating many colonial nation states and leaving only two independent nations 
liberia the black american colony and ethiopia this occupation continued until 
after the conclusion of the second world war when all colonial states gradually 
obtained formal independence today africa is home to over five zero independent 
countries all but two of which still have the borders drawn up during the era 
of european colonialism politics map showing european claimants to the african 
continent at the beginning of world war i precolonial africa colonial africa 
colonialism had a destabilizing effect on what had been a number of ethnic 
groups that is still being felt in african politics prior to european influence 
national borders were not much of a concern with africans generally following 
the practice of other areas of the world such as the arabian peninsula where a 
group s territory was congruent with its military or trade influence the 
european insistence of drawing borders around territories to isolate them from 
those of other colonial powers often had the effect of separating otherwise 
contiguous political groups or forcing traditional enemies to live side by side 
with no buffer between them for example the congo river although it appears to 
be a natural geographic boundary had groups that otherwise shared a language 
culture or other similarity who resided on both sides the division of the land 
between belgium and france along the river isolated these groups from each 
other those who lived in saharan or sub saharan africa and traded across the 
continent for centuries often found themselves crossing borders that existed 
only on european maps in nations that had substantial european populations for 
example rhodesia and south africa systems of second class citizenship were 
often set up in order to give europeans political power far in excess of their 
numbers however the lines were not often drawn strictly across racial lines in 
liberia the citizens who were descendants of american slaves managed to have a 
political system for over one zero zero years that gave ex slaves and natives 
to the area roughly equal legislative power despite the fact the ex slaves were 
outnumbered ten to one in the general population the inspiration for this 
system was the united states senate which had balanced the power of free and 
slave states despite the much larger population of the former europeans often 
changed the balance of power created ethnic divides where they did not 
previously exist and introduced a cultural dichotomy detrimental to the native 
inhabitants in the areas they controlled for example in what is now rwanda and 
burundi two ethnic groups hutus and tutsis had merged into one culture by the 
time belgian colonists had taken control of the region in the one nine th 
century no longer divided by ethnicity as intermingling inter marriage and 
merging of cultural practices over the centuries had long since erased visible 
signs of a culture divide the belgians instituted a policy of racial 
categorization upon taking control of the region as racial based categorization 
and philosophies was a fixture of the european culture of that time the term 
hutu originally referred to the agricultural based bantu speaking tribes that 
moved into present day rwandan and burundi from the west and the term tutsi 
referred to north eastern cattle based tribes that migrated into the region 
later the terms to the indigenous peoples eventually came to describe a person 
s economic class those individuals who owned roughly one zero or more cattle 
were considered tutsi and those with fewer were considered hutu regardless of 
ancestral history this was not a strict line but a general rule of thumb and 
one could move from hutu to tutsi and vice versa the belgians introduced a 
racialised system those individuals who had characteristics the europeans 
admired fairer skin ample height narrow noses etc were given power amongst the 
colonized peoples the belgians determined these features were more ideally 
hamitic hamitic in turn being more ideally european and belonged to those 
people closest to tutsi in ancestry they instituted a policy of issuing 
identity cards based on this philosophy those closest to this ideal were 
proclaimed tutsi and those not were proclaimed hutu post colonial africa since 
independence african states have frequently been hampered by instability 
corruption violence and authoritarianism the vast majority of african nations 
are republics that operate under some form of the presidential system of rule 
few nations in africa have been able to sustain democratic governments instead 
cycling through a series of brutal coups and military dictatorships a number of 
africa s post colonial political leaders were poorly educated and ignorant on 
matters of governance great instability however was mainly the result of 
marginalization of other ethnic groups and graft under these leaders as well 
many used the positions of power to ignite ethnic conflicts that had been 
exacerbated or even created under colonial rule in many countries the military 
was perceived as being the only group that could effectively maintain order and 
ruled most nations in africa during the seven zero s and early eight zero s 
during the period from the early one nine six zero s to the late one nine eight 
zero s africa had over seven zero coups and one three presidential 
assassinations cold war conflicts between the united states and the soviet 
union also played a role in the instability when a country became independent 
for the first time it was often expected to align with one of the two 
superpowers many countries in northern africa received soviet military aid 
while many in central and southern africa were supported by the united states 
and or france the one nine seven zero s saw an escalation as newly independent 
angola and mozambique aligned themselves with the soviet union and the west and 
south africa sought to contain soviet influence border and territorial disputes 
have also been common with the european imposed borders of many nations being 
widely contested through armed conflicts failed government policies and 
political corruption have also resulted in many widespread famines and 
significant portions of africa remain with distribution systems unable to 
disseminate enough food or water for the population to survive the spread of 
disease is also rampant especially the spread of the human immunodeficiency 
virus hiv and the associated acquired immune deficiency syndrome aids which has 
become a deadly epidemic on the continent despite numerous hardships there have 
been some signs the continent has hope for the future democratic governments 
seem to be spreading though are not yet the majority national geographic claims 
one three african nations can be considered truly democratic as well many 
nations have at least nominally recognized basic human rights for all citizens 
though in practice these are not always recognized and have created reasonably 
independent judiciaries there are clear signs of increased networking among 
african organisations and states in the civil war in the democratic republic of 
congo former zaire rather than rich non african countries intervening about 
half a dozen neighbouring african countries got involved see also second congo 
war the death toll has been estimated by some to be three five million since 
the conflict began in one nine nine eight this might play a role similar to 
that of world war ii for europe after which the people in the neighbouring 
countries decide to integrate their societies in such a way that war between 
them becomes as unthinkable as a war between say france and germany would be 
today political associations such as the african union are also offering hope 
for greater co operation and peace between the continent s many countries 
extensive human rights abuses still occur in several parts of africa often 
under the oversight of the state most of such violations occur for political 
reasons often times as a side effect of civil war countries where major human 
rights violations have been reported in recent times include the democratic 
republic of the congo sierra leone liberia sudan and c te d ivoire modern 
africa most western countries place limitations on aid to african nations 
especially the united states these limitations are often used to control the 
governments of these african nations as a result these nations are turning to 
non traditional sources of financial aid china has increasingly provided 
financial aid to africa in order to secure contracts on natural resources such 
as oil gold and diamonds there usually is no political prescription countries 
the chinese are investing in include central african republic plantations 
nigeria oil these groups are called north africans and sub saharan africans 
respectively afro asiatic speaking peoples predominate in north africa while 
sub saharan africa is dominated by a number of populations grouped according to 
their language niger congo predominantly in west africa nilo saharan in the 
eastern highlands and khoisan in the south speakers of bantu languages part of 
the niger congo family are the majority in southern central and east africa 
proper but there are also several nilotic groups in east africa and a few 
remaining indigenous khoisan san or bushmen and pygmy peoples in southern and 
central africa respectively bantu speaking africans also predominate in gabon 
and equatorial guinea and are found in parts of southern cameroon and southern 
somalia in the kalahari desert of southern africa the distinct people known as 
the bushmen also san closely related to but distinct from hottentots have long 
been present the san are physically distinct from other africans and are the 
indigenous people of southern africa pygmies are the pre bantu indigenous 
peoples of central africa the peoples of north africa comprise two main groups 
berber and arabic speaking peoples in the west and egyptians in the east the 
arabs who arrived in the seven th century introduced the arabic language and 
islam to north africa the semitic phoenicians and the european greeks and 
romans settled in north africa as well berbers still make up the majority in 
morocco while they are a significant minority within algeria they are also 
present in tunisia and libya the tuareg and other often nomadic peoples are the 
principal inhabitants of the saharan interior of north africa nubians are a 
nilo saharan speaking group though many also speak arabic who developed an 
ancient civilization in northeast africa during the past century or so small 
but economically important colonies of lebanese and chinese have also developed 
in the larger coastal cities of west and east africa respectively some 
ethiopian and eritrean groups like the amhara and tigrayans collectively known 
as habesha have semitic sabaean ancestry the somalis as a people originated in 
the ethiopian highlands but most somali clans can trace some arab ancestry as 
well sudan and mauritania are divided between a mostly arabized north and a 
native african south although the arabs of sudan clearly have a predominantly 
native african ancestry themselves some areas of east africa particularly the 
island of zanzibar and the kenyan island of lamu received arab muslim and 
southwest asian settlers and merchants throughout the middle ages and in 
antiquity beginning in the one six th century europeans such as the portuguese 
and dutch began to establish trading posts and forts along the coasts of 
western and southern africa eventually a large number of dutch augmented by 
french huguenots and germans settled in what is today south africa their 
descendants the afrikaners and the coloureds are the largest european descended 
groups in africa today in the one nine th century a second phase of 
colonization brought a large number of french and british settlers to africa 
the portuguese settled mainly in angola but also in mozambique the french 
settled in large numbers in algeria where they became known collectively as 
pieds noirs and on a smaller scale in other areas of north and west africa as 
well as in madagascar the british settled chiefly in south africa as well as 
the colony of rhodesia and in the highlands of what is now kenya germans 
settled in what is now tanzania and namibia and there is still a population of 
german speaking white namibians smaller numbers of european soldiers 
businessmen and officials also established themselves in administrative centers 
such as nairobi and dakar decolonization during the one nine six zero s often 
resulted in the mass emigration of european descended settlers out of africa 
especially from algeria angola kenya and rhodesia now zimbabwe however in south 
africa and namibia the white minority remained politically dominant after 
independence from europe and a significant population of white africans 
remained in these two countries even after democracy was finally instituted at 
the end of the cold war south africa has also become the preferred destination 
of white anglo zimbabweans and of migrants from all over southern africa 
european colonization also brought sizeable groups of asians particularly 
people from the indian subcontinent to british colonies large indian 
communities are found in south africa and smaller ones are present in kenya 
tanzania and some other southern and east african countries a fairly large 
indian community in uganda was expelled by the dictator idi amin in one nine 
seven two though many have since returned the islands in the indian ocean are 
also populated primarily by people of asian origin often mixed with africans 
and europeans the malagasy people of madagascar are a malay people but those 
along the coast are generally mixed with bantu arab indian and european origins 
malay and indian ancestries are also important components in the group of 
people known in south africa as coloureds people with origins in two or more 
races and continents languages map showing the distribution of african language 
families and some major african languages afro asiatic extends from the sahel 
to southwest asia niger congo is divided to show the size of the bantu sub 
family main article african languages by most estimates africa contains well 
over a thousand languages there are four major language families native to 
africa the afro asiatic languages are a language family of about two four zero 
languages and two eight five million people widespread throughout north africa 
east africa the sahel and southwest asia the nilo saharan language family 
consists of more than a hundred languages spoken by three zero million people 
nilo saharan languages are mainly spoken in chad sudan ethiopia uganda kenya 
and northern tanzania the niger congo language family covers much of sub 
saharan africa and is probably the largest language family in the world in 
terms of different languages a substantial number of them are the bantu 
languages spoken in much of sub saharan africa the khoisan languages number 
about five zero and are spoken in southern africa by approximately one two zero 
zero zero zero people many of the khoisan languages are endangered the khoi and 
san peoples are considered the original inhabitants of this part of africa with 
a few notable exceptions in east africa nearly all african countries have 
adopted official languages that originated outside the continent and spread 
through colonialism or human migration for example in numerous countries 
english and french are used for communication in the public sphere such as 
government commerce education and the media arabic portuguese afrikaans and 
malagasy are other examples of originally non african languages that are used 
by millions of africans today both in the public and private spheres culture 
africa has a number of overlapping cultures the most conventional distinction 
is that between sub saharan africa and the northern countries from egypt to 
morocco who largely associate themselves with arabic culture in this comparison 
the nations to the south of the sahara are considered to consist of many 
cultural areas in particular that of the bantu linguistic group divisions may 
also be made between francophone africa and the rest of africa in particular 
the former british colonies of southern and east africa another cultural fault 
line is that between those africans living traditional lifestyles and those who 
are essentially modern the traditionalists are sometimes subdivided into 
pastoralists and agriculturalists african art reflects the diversity of african 
cultures the oldest existing art from africa are six zero zero zero year old 
carvings found in niger while the great pyramid of giza in egypt was the world 
s tallest architectural accomplishment for four thousand years until the 
creation of the eiffel tower the ethiopian complex of monolithic churches at 
lalibela of which the church of st george is representative is regarded as 
another marvel of engineering the music of africa is one of its most dynamic 
art forms egypt has long been a cultural focus of the arab world while 
remembrance of the rhythms of sub saharan africa in particular west africa was 
transmitted through the atlantic slave trade to modern blues jazz reggae rap 
and rock and roll modern music of the continent includes the highly complex 
choral singing of southern africa and the dance rhythms of soukous dominated by 
the music of the democratic republic of congo a recent development of the two 
one st century is the emergence of african hip hop in particular a form from 
senegal is blended with traditional mbalax recently in south africa a form of 
music related to house music known under the name kwaito has developed although 
the country has been home to its own form of south african jazz for some time 
while afrikaans music is completely distinct and comprised mostly of 
traditional boere musiek and forms of folk and rock list of african musicians 
list of african writers african cinema afrology religion africans profess a 
wide variety of religious beliefs with christianity and islam being the most 
widespread approximately four zero of all africans are christians and another 
four zero muslims roughly two zero of africans primarily follow indigenous 
african religions a small number of africans also have beliefs from the judaic 
tradition such as the beta israel and lemba tribes the indigenous african 
religions tend to revolve around animism and ancestor worship a common thread 
in traditional belief systems was the division of the spiritual world into 
helpful and harmful helpful spirits are usually deemed to include ancestor 
spirits that help their descendants and powerful spirits that protected entire 
communities from natural disaster or attacks from enemies whereas harmful 
spirits include the souls of murdered victims who were buried without the 
proper funeral rites and spirits used by hostile spirit mediums to cause 
illness among their enemies while the effect of these early forms of worship 
continues to have a profound influence belief systems have evolved as they 
interact with other religions the formation of the old kingdom of egypt in the 
third millennium bce marked the first known complex religious system on the 
continent around the ninth century bce carthage in present day tunisia was 
founded by the phoenicians and went on to become a major cosmopolitan center 
where deities from neighboring egypt rome and the etruscan city states were 
worshipped the ethiopian orthodox church officially dates from the fourth 
century and is thus one of the first established christian churches anywhere at 
first christian orthodoxy made gains in modern day sudan and other neighbouring 
regions however following the spread of islam growth was slow and restricted to 
the highlands islam entered africa as muslims conquered north africa between 
six four zero and seven one zero beginning with egypt they established 
mogadishu melinde mombasa kilwa and sofala following the sea trade down the 
coast of east africa and diffusing through the sahara desert into the interior 
of africa following in particular the paths of muslim traders muslims were also 
among the asian peoples who later settled in british ruled africa many africans 
were converted to west european forms of christianity during the colonial 
period in the last decades of the twentieth century various sects of 
charismatic christianity rapidly grew a number of roman catholic african 
bishops were even mentioned as possible papal candidates in two zero zero five 
african christians appear to be more socially conservative than their co 
religionists in much of the industrialized world which has quite recently led 
to tensions within denominations such as the anglican and methodist churches 
territories regions of africa blue north africa green west africa brown central 
africa orange horn of africa magenta east africa red southern africa political 
map of africa physical map of africa independent states east africa east africa 
proper burundi also sometimes considered part of central africa kenya rwanda 
also sometimes considered part of central africa tanzania uganda north east 
africa horn of africa djibouti eritrea ethiopia somalia including somaliland 
central africa burundi also sometimes considered part of east africa central 
african republic chad also sometimes considered part of west africa democratic 
republic of the congo equatorial guinea also sometimes considered part of west 
africa gabon also sometimes considered part of west africa rwanda also 
sometimes considered part of east africa republic of congo north africa algeria 
egypt libya mauritania morocco sudan tunisia southern africa angola also 
sometimes considered part of central africa botswana lesotho malawi mozambique 
also sometimes considered part of east africa namibia south africa swaziland 
zambia also sometimes considered part of central africa zimbabwe west africa 
benin burkina faso cameroon also sometimes considered part of central africa 
chad also sometimes considered part of central africa c te d ivoire equatorial 
guinea also sometimes considered part of central africa gabon also sometimes 
considered part of central africa the gambia ghana guinea guinea bissau liberia 
mali niger nigeria senegal sierra leone togo african island nations cape verde 
west africa comoros southern africa madagascar southern africa mauritius 
southern africa s o tom and pr ncipe central africa or west africa seychelles 
east africa territories possessions d partements canary islands spain ceuta and 
melilla spain claimed by morocco madeira portugal mayotte france r union france 
saint helena including dependencies ascension island and tristan da cunha 
united kingdom disputed territories western sahara is claimed and mostly 
occupied by morocco the remainder is administered by the sahrawi arab 
democratic republic table of territories and regions notes continental regions 
as per depending on definitions egypt has territory in one or both of africa 
and asia western sahara is claimed and mostly occupied by morocco the remainder 
is administered by the sahrawi arab democratic republic the spanish canary 
islands of which las palmas de gran canaria are santa cruz de tenerife are co 
capitals are often considered part of northern africa due to their relative 
proximity to morocco and western sahara population and area figures are for two 
zero zero one the spanish exclave of ceuta is surrounded on land by morocco in 
northern africa population and area figures are for two zero zero one the 
portuguese madeira islands are often considered part of northern africa due to 
their relative proximity to morocco population and area figures are for two 
zero zero one the spanish exclave of melilla is surrounded on land by morocco 
in northern africa population and area figures are for two zero zero one 
bloemfontein is the judicial capital of south africa while cape town is its 
legislative seat and pretoria is the country s administrative seat yamoussoukro 
is the official capital of c te d ivoire while abidjan is the de facto seat see 
also two zero zero five in africa two zero zero six in africa three one st g 
eight summit aids in africa african anarchism african philosophy african union 
african cuisine confederation of african football congo craton ecology of 
africa education in africa history of africa human rights in africa regions of 
africa sub saharan africa universities in africa heart of africa game list of 
african countries by population density list of african countries by population 
list of african countries by gdp list of african stock exchanges external links 
news allafrica com current news events and statistics bbc news in depth africa 
two zero zero five time for change guardian unlimited special report hear 
africa zero five directories contemporary africa database the index on africa 
directory from the norwegian council for africa open directory project africa 
directory category columbia university african studies library of congress 
african middle eastern reading room stanford university africa south of the 
sahara university of chicago joseph regenstein library african studies 
university of pennsylvania african studies center africa homepage politics 
africa action africa action is the oldest organization in the us working on 
africa affairs it is a national organization that works for political economic 
and social justice in africa african anarchism the history of a movement an 
irish anarchist in africa western africa from anarchist perspective commission 
for africa african unification front working class history in africa people s 
and grassroots histories photos and information jungle photos jungle photos 
africa provides images and information on various countries in sub saharan 
africa africam african wildlife webcams afrika no news news african news agency 
inter press service africa sports confederation of african football in english 
and french tourism africa continents austin is a word that may refer to various 
things austin can also be a given name places in the u s austin may be the name 
of a town or city in the u s austin texas the capital of texas best known city 
with this name austin arkansas austin colorado austin indiana austin kentucky 
austin township michigan austin minnesota austin township minnesota austin 
nevada austin north carolina austin pennsylvania austin utah port austin 
michigan austinburg ohio other places in the u s named austin austin chicago a 
neighborhood in chicago austin college a college in sherman texas lake austin 
places in canada austin flat british columbia austin heights british columbia 
austin subdivision no one british columbia austin subdivision no two british 
columbia austin manitoba austin ontario austin quebec names of people named 
austin austin powers a fictional movie spy albert austin herbert austin sir 
herbert austin founder of the austin motor company john austin legal philosophy 
j l austin philosopher john arnold austin united states navy warrant officer 
phil austin member of the firesign theatre sherrie austin musician stephen f 
austin founder of texas steve austin fictional character the title character in 
martin caidin s novel cyborg which inspired the tv series the six million 
dollar man col steve austin fictional character the lead character played by 
lee majors in the tv series the six million dollar man stone cold steve austin 
a professional wrestler turned actor saint augustine noticeable in the english 
version austin friars to refer to the augustinian order see also jane austen 
the author things named austin austin motor company a british make of car 
american austin car company a short lived united states make of automobile 
austin brand a brand owned by the kellogg company uss austin a sloop of war 
originally in the texas navy uss austin de one five a destroyer escort uss 
austin lpd four an amphibious transport dock austin elementary school image 
animexample gif this animation moves at one zero frames per second image 
animexample two gif this animation moves at two frames per second at this rate 
the individual frames should be discernible image animhorse gif one two frames 
per second is the typical rate for an animated cartoon animation is the 
illusion of motion created by the consecutive display of images of static 
elements in film and video production this refers to techniques by which each 
frame of a film or movie is produced individually these frames may be generated 
by computers or by photographing a drawn or painted image or by repeatedly 
making small changes to a model unit see claymation and stop motion and then 
photographing the result with a special animation camera when the frames are 
strung together and the resulting film is viewed there is an illusion of 
continuous movement due to the phenomenon known as persistence of vision 
generating such a film tends to be very labour intensive and tedious though the 
development of computer animation has greatly sped up the process graphics file 
formats like gif mng svg and flash swf allow animation to be viewed on a 
computer or over the internet the animations shown before consist of these six 
frames toc animation techniques traditional animation began with each frame 
being painted and then filmed cel animation developed by bray and hurd in the 
one nine one zero s sped up the process by using transparent overlays so that 
characters could be moved without the need to repaint the background for every 
frame more recently styles of animation based on painting and drawing have 
evolved such as the minimalist simpsons cartoons or the roughly sketched the 
snowman computer animation has advanced rapidly and is now approaching the 
point where movies can be created with characters so lifelike as to be hard to 
distinguish from real actors this involved a move from two d to three d the 
difference being that in two d animation the effect of perspective is created 
artistically but in three d objects are modeled in an internal three d 
representation within the computer and are then lit and shot from chosen angles 
just as in real life before being rendered to a two d bitmapped frame 
predictions that famous dead actors might even be brought back to life to play 
in new movies before long have led to speculation about the moral and copyright 
issues involved the use of computer animation as a way of achieving the 
otherwise impossible in conventionally shot movies has led to the term computer 
generated imagery being used though the term has become hard to distinguish 
from computer animation as it is now used in referring to three d movies that 
are entirely animated computer animation involves modelling motion generation 
followed by the addition of surfaces and then rendering surfaces are programmed 
to stretch and bend automatically in response to movements of a wire frame 
model and the final rendering converts such movements to a bitmap image it is 
the recent developments in rendering complex surfaces like fur and clothing 
textures that have enabled stunningly life like character models including 
surfaces that even ripple fold and blow in the wind with every fibre or hair 
individually calculated for rendering however that actually has little to do 
with the animation itself animation is the process of bringing a lifeless 
puppet to life through the use of motion many people confuse fancy effects and 
high res textures with animation but in fact life like motion can be created 
using the simplest of models pixar s work is a testament to this the goal of an 
animator is not simply to copy the real world but to enhance and to take the 
essence of the motion that is there and this is how animation can be elevated 
to the level of art there is a large misconception in the public mind that 
computers create animation today this couldn t be further from the truth a 
computer is nothing more though also nothing less than a very expensive fancy 
pencil and has to be treated as such for any quality work to be acheived the 
choices a computer makes when interpolating motion are almost always the wrong 
ones because the computer does not know what you are trying to create even if a 
complex physics system were created complete enough to exactly mimic the real 
world the end result would not be the desirable one because a large part of 
animation concerns the choices an animator makes when a computer tries to make 
the choices for you disaster is the general result history the major use of 
animation has always been for entertainment however there is growing use of 
instructional animation and educational animation to support explanation and 
learning the classic form of animation the animated cartoon as developed in the 
early one nine zero zero s and refined by ub iwerks walt disney and others 
requires up to two four distinct drawings for one second of animation this 
technique is described in detail in the article traditional animation because 
animation is very time consuming and often very expensive to produce the 
majority of animation for tv and movies comes from professional animation 
studios however the field of independent animation has existed at least since 
the one nine five zero s with animation being produced by independent studios 
and sometimes by a single person several independent animation producers have 
gone on to enter the professional animation industry bill plympton is one of 
the most well known independent animators today limited animation is a way of 
increasing production and decreasing costs of animation by using short cuts in 
the animation process this method was pioneered by upa and popularized some say 
exploited by hanna barbera and adapted by other studios as cartoons moved from 
movie theaters to television animation studios animation studios like movie 
studios may be production facilities or financial entities in some cases 
especially in anime they have things in common with artists studios where a 
master or group of talented individuals oversee the work of lesser artists and 
crafts persons in realising their vision styles and techniques of animation 
branch pages computer animation computer generated imagery traditional 
animation animated cartoon motion capture avar animation variable wire frame 
model animated series anime japanese animation list of animation studios famous 
names in animation see also list of motion picture topics list of movie genres 
further readings frank thomas and ollie johnston disney animation the illusion 
of life abbeville one nine eight one walters faber helen walters algrant ed 
animation unlimited innovative short films since one nine four zero 
harpercollins publishers two zero zero four trish ledoux doug ranney fred 
patten ed complete anime guide japanese animation film directory and resource 
guide tiger mountain press one nine nine seven the animator s survival kit 
richard williams animation script to screen shamus culhane the animation book 
kit laybourne external links writing for animation animating under the camera 
experimental animation techniques drawn under camera style animation matt world 
web based animations from animator matt greenwood keyframe the animation 
resource the animation department of the national film and television school uk 
animation nation a forum for professional animators chronology of animation 
zagreb film saf akovec school of animation animation directory don markenstein 
s toonopedia big cartoon database golden age of cartoons hints and tips for the 
animation hobbyist acme animation animation world network two eight principles 
of animation animationmeat com notes model sheets and reference material by 
professional animators media techniques in animation animation film statue of 
apollo at the british museum in greek and roman mythology apollo greek ap ll n 
or apell n was a god of light healing and poetry apollo was the son of zeus and 
leto and the twin brother of artemis goddess of the hunt as the prophetic deity 
of the delphic oracle apollo was one of the most important and many sided of 
the olympian deities in etruscan mythology he was known as aplu in later times 
apollo became partly confused or equated with helios god of the sun and his 
sister similarly equated with selene god of the moon particularly in religious 
contexts however apollo and helios remained separate beings in literary and 
mythological texts domains and symbols apollo the son of zeus and the mortal 
leto apollo was considered to have dominion over disease beauty light healing 
colonists medicine archery poetry prophecy dance reason intellectualism and 
shamans and was the patron defender of herds and flocks apollo s most common 
attributes were the lyre and the bow other attributes of his included the 
kithara an advanced version of the common lyre and plectrum another common 
emblem was the sacrificial tripod representing his prophetic powers the pythian 
games were held in apollo s honor every four years at delphi the laurel bay 
plant was used in expiatory sacrifices and in making the crown of victory at 
these games the palm tree was also sacred to apollo because he had been born 
under one in delos animals sacred to apollo included wolves dolphins and roe 
swans and grasshoppers symbolizing music and song hawks ravens crows and snakes 
referencing apollo s function as the god of prophecy mice and griffins mythical 
eagle lion hybrids of eastern origin as god of colonization apollo gave 
guidance on colonies especially during the height of colonization seven five 
zero five five zero bc according to greek tradition he helped cretan or 
arcadian colonists find the city of troy however this story may reflect a 
cultural influence which had the reverse direction hittite cuneiform texts 
mention a minor asian god called appaliunas or apalunas in connection with the 
city of wilusa which is now regarded as being identical with the greek illios 
by most scholars in this interpretation apollo s title of lykegenes can simply 
be read as born in lycia which effectively severs the god s supposed link with 
wolves possibly a folk etymology apollo popularly e g in literary criticism 
represents harmony order and reasons characteristics contrasted with those of 
dionysus god of wine who popularly represents emotion and disorder the contrast 
between the roles of these gods is reflected in the adjectives apollonian and 
dionysian however the greeks thought of the two qualities as complementary the 
two gods are brothers and when apollo at winter left for hyperborea he would 
leave the delphi oracle to dionysus worship apollo had a famous oracle in 
delphi and other notable ones in clarus and branchidae apollo is known as the 
leader of the muses musagetes and director of their choir hymns sung to apollo 
were called paeans the roman worship of apollo was adopted from the greeks 
there is a tradition that the delphic oracle was consulted as early as the 
period of the kings during the reign of tarquinius superbus in four three zero 
a temple was dedicated to apollo on the occasion of a pestilence during the 
second punic war in two one two the ludi apollinares were instituted in his 
honor in the time of augustus who considered himself under the special 
protection of apollo and was even said to be his son his worship developed and 
he became one of the chief gods of rome after the battle of actium augustus 
enlarged his old temple dedicated a portion of the spoils to him and instituted 
quinquennial games in his honour he also erected a new temple on the palatine 
hill and transferred the secular games for which horace composed his carmen 
saeculare to apollo and diana the chief festivals held in honour of apollo were 
the carneia daphnephoria delia hyacinthia pyanepsia pythia and thargelia the 
ludi apollinares were solemn games held to honor him the worship of apollo has 
returned with the rise of revivalist hellenic polytheism and the contemporary 
pagan movement one example of this revival is the group kyklos apollon also 
together with athena apollo under the name phevos was controversially 
designated as a mascot of the two zero zero four summer olympics in athens 
etymology the name apollo might have been derived from a pre hellenic compound 
apo ollon likely related to an archaic verb apo ell and literally meaning he 
who elbows off that is the dispelling one indeed he seems to have personified 
dispelling power which would relate to his association with the darkness 
dispelling power of the morning sun and the conceived power of reason and 
prophecy to dispel doubt and ignorance in addition the apparent expelling 
character of city walls and doorways as bulwarks against trespassers the people 
dispelling nature of disembarkations and expatriations to colonies the disease 
dispelling character of healing the predator dispelling character of a shepherd 
tending his flocks the pest dispelling nature of a farmer growing crops the 
power of music and the arts to dispel discord and barbary the highly important 
power of fit and skilled young men to dispel intruders and invading armies the 
ability of foresight into the future an explanation given by plutarch in 
moralia is that apollon signified a unity since pollon meant many and the 
prefix a was a negative thus apollon could be read as meaning deprived of 
multitude apollo was consequently associated with the monad hesychius connects 
the name apollo with the doric which means assembly so that apollo would be the 
god of political life and he also gives the explanation fold in which case 
apollo would be the god of flocks and herds apollo with a radiant halo in a 
roman floor mosaic el djem tunisia lare two nd century apollo in art in art 
apollo is usually depicted as a handsome beardless young man and often with a 
lyre or bow in hand in the late two nd century floor mosaic from el djem roman 
thysdrus illustration right he is identifiable as apollo helios by his 
effulgent halo though now even a god s divine nakedness is concealed by his 
cloak a mark of increasing conventions of modesty in the later empire anther 
haloed apollo in mosaic from hadrumentum is in the museum at sousse the 
conventions of this representation head tilted lips slightly parted large eyed 
curling hair cut in locks grazing the neck were developed in the three rd 
century bce to depict alexander the great bieber one nine six four yalouris one 
nine eight zero some time after this mosaic was executed the earliest 
depictions of christ will be beardless and haloed appellations epithets applied 
to apollo include phoebus shining one for apollo in the context of the god of 
light smintheus mouse catcher and parnopius grasshopper as god of the plague 
and defender against rats and locusts delphinios delphinian meaning of the womb 
associating apollo with delphoi delphi an aitiology in the homeric hymns 
connects the epitheton to dolphins archegetes director of the foundation for 
colonies musagetes leader of the muses pythios pythian at delphi apotropaeus he 
who averts evil nymphegetes nymph leader lyceios and lykegenes wolfish or of 
lycia where some postulate his cult originated nomios wandering as the pastoral 
shepherd god klarios from doric klaros allotment of land for his supervision 
over cities and colonies kynthios is another epithet stemming from his birth on 
mt cynthus loxias the obscure as apollo a god of prophecy specifically 
argurotoxos with the silver bow for archery aphetoros god of the bow for 
archery alexikakos restrainer of evil as apollo the healer akesios or iatros 
healer birth when hera discovered that leto was pregnant and that hera s 
husband zeus was the father she banned leto from giving birth on terra firma or 
the mainland or any island at sea in her wanderings leto found the newly 
created floating island of delos which was neither mainland nor a real island 
and gave birth there the island was surrounded by swans afterwards zeus secured 
delos to the bottom of the ocean this island later became sacred to apollo 
alternatively hera kidnapped ilithyia the goddess of childbirth to prevent leto 
from going into labor the other gods tricked hera into letting her go by 
offering her a necklace nine yards long of amber either way artemis was born 
first and then assisted with the birth of apollo another version states that 
artemis was born one day before apollo on the island of ortygia and that she 
helped leto cross the sea to delos the next day to give birth to apollo apollo 
was born on the seven th day of the month thargelion according to delian 
tradition or of the month bysios according to delphian tradition the seven th 
and two zero th the days of the new and full moon were ever afterwards held 
sacred to him youth in his youth apollo killed the vicious dragon python which 
lived in delphi beside the castalian spring according to some because python 
had attempted to rape leto while she was pregnant with apollo and artemis this 
was the spring which emitted vapors that caused the oracle at delphi to give 
her prophesies apollo killed python but had to be punished for it since python 
was a child of gaia apollo and admetus when zeus struck down apollo s son 
asclepius with a lightning bolt for resurrecting the dead and thus stealing 
hades s subjects apollo in revenge killed the cyclops who had fashioned the 
bolt for zeus apollo would have been banished to tartarus forever but was 
instead sentenced to one year of hard labour as punishment thanks to the 
intercession of his mother leto during this time he served as shepherd for king 
admetus of pherae in thessaly admetus treated apollo well and in return the god 
conferred great benefits on admetus apollo helped admetus win alcestis the 
daughtor of king pelias and later convinced the fates to let admetus live past 
his time if another took his place but when it came time for admetus to die his 
elderly parents whom he had assumed would gladly die for him refused to 
cooperate instead alcestis took his place but heracles managed to persuade 
thanatos the god of death to return her to the world of the living apollo 
during the trojan war apollo shot arrows infected with the plague into the 
greek encampment during the trojan war in rage because the greeks had kidnapped 
chryseis the daughter of apollo s priest he demanded her return and the greeks 
eventually complied when diomedes injured aeneas during the trojan war apollo 
rescued him first aphrodite tried to rescue aeneas but diomedes injured her as 
well aeneas was then enveloped in a cloud by apollo who took him to pergamos a 
sacred spot in troy artemis healed aeneas there apollo had aided paris in the 
killing of achilles if paris did not accomplish the task himself niobe a queen 
of thebes and wife of amphion niobe boasted of her superiority to leto because 
she had fourteen children niobids seven male and seven female while leto had 
only two apollo killed her sons as they practiced athletics with the last 
begging for his life and artemis her daughters apollo and artemis used poisoned 
arrows to kill them though according to some versions of the myth a number of 
the niobids were spared chloris usually amphion at the sight of his dead sons 
either killed himself or was killed by apollo after swearing revenge a 
devastated niobe fled to mt siplyon in asia minor and turned into stone as she 
wept her tears formed the river achelous zeus had turned all the people of 
thebes to stone and so no one buried the niobids until the ninth day after 
their death when the gods themselves entombed them apollo s romantic life and 
children female lovers apollo chased the nymph daphne daughter of peneus who 
had scorned him his infatuation was caused by an arrow from eros who was 
jealous because apollo had made fun of his archery skills eros also claimed to 
be irritated by apollo s singing simultaneously however eros had shot a hate 
arrow into daphne causing her to be repulsed by apollo following a spirited 
chase by apollo daphne prayed to mother earth alternatively her father a river 
god to help her and he changed her into a laurel tree which became sacred to 
apollo apollo had an affair with a mortal princess named leucothea daughter of 
orchamus and sister of clytia leucothea loved apollo who disguised himself as 
leucothea s mother to gain entrance to her chambers clytia jealous of her 
sister because she wanted apollo for herself told orchamus the truth betraying 
her sister s trust and confidence in her enraged orchamus ordered leucothea to 
be buried alive apollo refused to forgive clytia for betraying his beloved and 
a grieving clytia wilted and slowly died apollo changed her into an incense 
plant either heliotrope or sunflower which follows the sun every day marpessa 
was kidnapped by idas but was loved by apollo as well zeus made her choose 
between them and she chose idas on the grounds that apollo being immortal would 
tire of her when she grew old castalia was a nymph whom apollo loved she fled 
from him and dived into the spring at delphi at the base of mt parnassos which 
was then named after her water from this spring was sacred it was used to clean 
the delphian temples and inspire poets by cyrene apollo had a son named 
aristaeus who became the patron god of cattle fruit trees hunting husbandry and 
bee keeping he was also a culture hero and taught humanity dairy skills and the 
use of nets and traps in hunting as well as how to cultivate olives with hecuba 
wife of king priam of troy apollo had a son named troilius an oracle prophesied 
that troy would not be defeated as long as troilius reached the age of twenty 
alive he and his sister polyxena were ambushed and killed by achilles apollo 
also fell in love with cassandra daughter of hecuba and priam and troilius half 
sister he promised cassandra the gift of prophecy to seduce her but she 
rejected him afterwards enraged apollo indeed gifted her with the ability to 
know the future with a curse that no one would ever believe her coronis 
daughter of phlegyas king of the lapiths was another of apollo s liaisons 
pregnant with asclepius coronis fell in love with ischys son of elatus a crow 
informed apollo of the affair when first informed he disbelieved the crow and 
turned all crows black where they were previously white as a punishment for 
speading untruths when he found out the truth he sent his sister artemis to 
kill coronis as a result he also made the crow sacred and gave them the task of 
announcing important deaths apollo rescued the baby and gave it to the centaur 
chiron to raise phlegyas was irate after the death of his daughter and burned 
the temple of apollo at delphi apollo then killed him for what he did male 
lovers apollo and hyacinthus jacopo caraglio one six th c italian engraving 
apollo the eternal beardless kouros himself had the most male lovers of all the 
greek gods that was to be expected from a god who was god of the palaestra the 
athletic gathering place for youth who all competed in the nude a god said to 
represent the ideal educator and therefore the ideal erastes or lover of a boy 
sergent p one zero two all his lovers were younger than him in the style of the 
greek pederastic relationships of the time many of apollo s young beloveds died 
accidentally a reflection on the function of these myths as part of rites of 
passage in which the youth died in order to be reborn as an adult hyacinth was 
one of his male lovers hyacinthus was a spartan prince beautiful and athletic 
the pair were practicing throwing the discus when hyacinthus was struck in the 
head by a discus blown off course by zephyrus who was jealous of apollo and 
loved hyacinthus as well when hyacinthus died apollo is said in some accounts 
to have been so filled with grief that he cursed his own immortality wishing to 
join his lover in mortal death out of the blood of his slain lover apollo 
created the hyacinth flower as a memorial to his death and his tears stained 
the flower petals with meaning alas the festival of hyacinthus was a 
celebration of sparta one of his other liaisons was with acantha the spirit of 
the acanthus tree upon his death he was transformed into a sun loving herb by 
apollo and his bereaved sister acanthis was turned into a thistle finch by the 
other gods another male lover was cyparissus a descendant of heracles apollo 
gave the boy a tame deer as a companion but cyparissus accidentally killed it 
with a javelin as it lay asleep in the undergrowth cyparissus asked apollo to 
let his tears fall forever apollo turned the sad boy into a cypress tree which 
was said to be a sad tree because the sap forms droplets like tears on the 
trunk apollo and the birth of hermes hermes was born on mount cyllene in 
arcadia the story is told in the homeric hymn to hermes his mother maia had 
been secretly impregnated by zeus in a secret affair maia wrapped the infant in 
blankets but hermes escaped while she was asleep hermes ran to thessaly where 
apollo was grazing his cattle the infant hermes stole a number of his cows and 
took them to a cave in the woods near pylos covering their tracks in the cave 
he found a tortoise and killed it then removed the insides he used one of the 
cow s intestines and the tortoise shell and made the first lyre apollo 
complained to maia that her son had stolen his cattle but hermes had already 
replaced himself in the blankets she had wrapped him in so maia refused to 
believe apollo s claim zeus intervened and claiming to have seen the events 
sided with apollo hermes then began to play music on the lyre he had invented 
apollo a god of music fell in love with the instrument and offered to allow 
exchange the cattle for the lyre hence apollo became a master of the lyre and 
hermes invented a kind of pipes instrument called a syrinx later apollo 
exchanged a caduceus for a syrinx from hermes other stories musical contests 
pan once pan had the audacity to compare his music with that of apollo and to 
challenge apollo the god of the lyre to a trial of skill tmolus the mountain 
god was chosen to umpire pan blew on his pipes and with his rustic melody gave 
great satisfaction to himself and his faithful follower midas who happened to 
be present then apollo struck the strings of his lyre tmolus at once awarded 
the victory to apollo and all but midas agreed with the judgment he dissented 
and questioned the justice of the award apollo would not suffer such a depraved 
pair of ears any longer and caused them to become the ears of a donkey marsyas 
the flaying of marsyas by titian c one five seven zero seven six marsyas was a 
satyr who challenged apollo to a contest of music he had found an aulos on the 
ground tossed away after being invented by athena because it made her cheeks 
puffy marsyas lost and was flayed alive in a cave near calaenae in phrygia for 
his hubris to challenge a god his blood turned into the river marsyas another 
variation is that apollo played his instrument the lyre upside down marsyas 
could not do this with his instrument the flute and so apollo hung him from a 
tree and flayed him alive taken from man myth who mourns for adonis a man 
claiming to be apollo is seen on a greek themed planet that captain kirk pavel 
chekov mr spock and dr mccoy arrive on in the battlestar galactica series one 
of the main characters is given the call sign of apollo the song cygnus x one 
book ii hemispheres by rush is about the struggle between the champions of the 
two hemispheres apollo the god of reason and dionysus the god of love the song 
appears of the one nine seven eight album hemispheres in the sixties nasa named 
its apollo lunar program because apollo was considered the god of all wisdom 
many people mistakenly believe that the rockets that carried astronauts to the 
moon were called apollo rockets they were saturn v rockets references f l w 
schwartz de antiquissima apollinis natura berlin one eight four three j a sch 
nborn ber das wesen apollons berlin one eight five four arthur milchhoefer ber 
den attischen apollon munich one eight seven three theodor schreiber apollon 
pythoktonos leipzig one eight seven nine w h roscher studien zur vergleichenden 
mythologie der griechen und romer i leipzig one eight seven three r hecker de 
apollinis apud romanos cultu leipzig one eight seven nine gaston colin le culte 
d apollon pythien ath nes one nine zero five louis dyer studies of the gods in 
greece one eight nine one articles in pauly wissowa s realencyclop die w h 
roscher s lexikon der mythologie and daremberg and saglio s dictionnaire des 
antiquit s l preller griechische und romische mythologie four th ed by c robert 
j marquardt r mische staalsverwaltung iii g wissowa religion und kultus der 
romer one nine zero two d bassi saggio di bibliografia mitologica i apollo one 
eight nine six l farnell cults of the greek states iv one nine zero seven o 
gruppe griechische mythologie und religionsgeschichte ii one nine zero six m 
bieber one nine six four alexander the great in greek and roman art chicago n 
yalouris one nine eight zero the search for alexander boston exhibition two for 
the iconography of the alexander helios type see h hoffmann helios journal of 
the arnerican research center in egypt two one nine six three one one seven two 
three cf yalouris no four two external links greek mythology resource the 
temple of apollo rome the stories of apollo and hyacinthus and apollo and 
cyparissus and apollo and orpheus apollo and the romans greek gods roman gods 
solar gods pederastic heroes and deities andre kirk agassi born april two nine 
one nine seven zero in las vegas nevada is a professional male former world no 
one tennis player from the united states he has won eight grand slam singles 
titles and is one of only five players to have won all four grand slam events 
he is considered among the all time great tennis players agassi was married to 
the actress brooke shields from one nine nine seven to one nine nine nine since 
two zero zero one he has been married to the former world no one woman tennis 
player steffi graf and had two children early life agassi s father an armenian 
from iran emmanuel mike agassian who represented iran in boxing at the one nine 
four eight and one nine five two olympic games before emigrating to the united 
states was intent on having a child win all four tennis grand slams he called 
agassi s two older siblings guinea pigs in the development of his coaching 
techniques he honed andre s eye coordination when he was an infant by hanging 
tennis balls above his crib he gave agassi paddles and balloons when he was 
still in a high chair when agassi started playing tennis his ball collection 
filled six zero garbage cans with three zero zero balls per can and agassi 
would hit three zero zero zero five zero zero zero balls every day when andre 
was five years old he was already practicing with pros such as jimmy connors 
and roscoe tanner mike agassi learned tennis by watching tapes of champions 
mike agassi took a very systematic approach to the physics and psychology of 
tennis and still remains active in the sport more information can be found in 
mike agassi s book the agassi story at age of one four andre was shipped off to 
teaching guru nick bollettieri s tennis academy in florida he turned 
professional when he was one six tennis career one nine eight six one nine nine 
seven agassi turned professional in one nine eight six and won his first top 
level singles title in one nine eight seven at itaparica he won six further 
tournaments in one nine eight eight and by december that year he had surpassed 
us two million in career prize money after playing in just four three 
tournaments the quickest player in history to do so as a young up and coming 
player agassi embraced a rebel image he grew his hair to rock star length 
sported an ear ring and wore colorful shirts that pushed tennis still strict 
sartorial boundaries he boasted of a cheeseburger heavy diet and endorsed the 
canon rebel camera image is everything was the ad s tag line and it became 
andre s as well strong performances on the tour meant that agassi was quickly 
tipped as a future grand slam champion but he began the one nine nine zero s 
with a series of near misses he reached his first grand slam final in one nine 
nine zero at the french open where he lost in four sets to the seasoned veteran 
player andr s g mez later that year he lost in the final of the us open to 
another up and coming teenaged star pete sampras the rivalry between these two 
american players was to become the dominant rivalry in tennis over the rest the 
of the decade in one nine nine one agassi reached his second consecutive french 
open final where he faced his former bollettieri academy mate jim courier 
courier emerged the victor in a dramatic rain interrupted five set final agassi 
chose not to play at wimbledon from one nine eight eight nine zero and publicly 
stated that he did not wish to play there because of the event s traditionalism 
particularly its predominantly white dress code which players at the event are 
required to conform to many observers at the time speculated that agassi s real 
motivation was that his strong baseline game would not be well suited to 
wimbledon s grass court surface agassi decided to play at wimbledon in one nine 
nine one leading to weeks of speculation in the media about what he would wear 
he eventually emerged for the first round in a completely white outfit he 
reached the quarter finals on that occasion to the surprise of many agassi s 
grand slam breakthrough came at wimbledon in one nine nine two when he beat 
goran ivani evi in a tight five set final following wrist surgery in one nine 
nine three agassi came back strongly in one nine nine four and captured the us 
open beating michael stich in the final he then captured his first australian 
open title in one nine nine five beating sampras in a four set final he won a 
career high seven titles that year and he reached the world no one ranking for 
the first time that april he held it for three zero weeks on that occasion 
through to november he compiled a career best two six match winning streak 
during the summer hardcourt circuit which ended when he lost in the us open 
final to sampras in one nine nine five agassi won seven singles titles the 
biggest being the australian open the cincinnati masters the miami masters and 
the canada masters in terms of win loss record one nine nine five was agassi s 
best year seven two one zero includes davis cup this is slightly short of 
sampras s best season one nine nine four in which he sampras won seven seven 
matches and lost one two in one nine nine six agassi won the men s singles gold 
medal at the olympic games in atlanta beating sergi bruguera of spain in 
straight sets in the final he also repeated at the cincinnati masters and the 
miami masters one nine nine seven was a poor year for agassi he won no top 
level titles and his ranking sank to world no one four one in november his form 
was perhaps affected by the intense publicity surrounding his high profile and 
turbulent relationship and marriage to actress brooke shields one nine nine 
eight two zero zero four in one nine nine eight agassi rededicated himself to 
tennis he shaved his balding head began a rigorous conditioning program and 
worked his way back up the rankings by playing in challenger series tournaments 
a circuit for professional players ranked outside the world s top five zero 
perhaps most remarkably the one time rebel emerged as a gracious and thoughtful 
athlete looked up to by younger players after winning matches he took to bowing 
and blowing a two handed kisses to spectators on each side of the court a 
gesture seen as a rather humble acknowledgment of their support for him and for 
tennis in one nine nine eight agassi won five titles and leapt from no one two 
two on the rankings at the start of the year to no six at the end of it making 
it the highest jump into the top one zero made by any player in tennis he won 
five titles in ten finals and finished runner up at the miami masters agassi 
entered the history books in one nine nine nine when he beat andrei medvedev in 
a five set french open final to become only the fifth male player to have won 
all four grand slam singles titles a feat last achieved in the one nine six 
zero s by roy emerson he followed this up by reaching the wimbledon final where 
he lost to sampras he then won the us open beating todd martin in five sets in 
the final and finished the year ranked the world no one agassi began two zero 
zero zero by capturing his second australian open title beating yevgeny 
kafelnikov in a four set final he was the first male player to have reached 
four consecutive grand slam finals since rod laver achieved the grand slam in 
one nine six nine two zero zero zero also saw agassi reach the semi finals at 
wimbledon where he lost in five sets to patrick rafter in a very high quality 
battle considered by many to be one of the best matches ever played at 
wimbledon at the inaugural tennis masters cup in lisbon agassi made it all the 
way to the final after defeating marat safin six three six three in the 
semifinals to end the russian s hopes to become the youngest world no one in 
the history of tennis agassi eventually lost to gustavo kuerten six four six 
four six four this loss allowed kuerten to be crowned year end world no one two 
zero zero zero is considered by many of his fans to be a disappointing season 
for agassi as he managed to win only one tournament two zero zero zero 
australian open agassi opened two zero zero one by successfully defending his 
australian open title with a straight sets final win over arnaud clement at 
wimbledon he battled rafter again in the semi finals and lost eight six in the 
fifth set at the us open he lost in the quarter finals to sampras in what is 
considered to be one of tournament s all time greatest matches sampras won six 
seven seven six seven six seven six in a match with no breaks of serve agassi 
and sampras last duel came in the final of the us open in two zero zero two the 
battle between the two veterans saw sampras emerge victorious in four sets and 
left sampras with a two zero one four edge in their three four career meetings 
the match in fact proved to be the last of sampras career he did not play in an 
event on the professional tour again and officially announced his retirement in 
two zero zero three agassi s us open finish along with his victories at the 
miami masters rome masters and madrid masters helped him finish two zero zero 
two as the oldest year end no two at three two years and eight months in two 
zero zero three agassi won the eighth grand slam title of his career at the 
australian open where he beat rainer sch ttler in straight sets in the final in 
may that year he recaptured the world no one ranking to become the oldest no 
one ranked male tennis player in history at three three years and one three 
days he held the no one ranking on that occasion for one three weeks at the 
year end tennis masters cup he lost in the final to roger federer and finished 
the year ranked world no four in two zero zero four the three four year old 
agassi won the cincinnati masters to bring his career total to five nine top 
level singles titles and a record one seven atp masters series titles he became 
the second oldest singles champion in cincinnati s storied history the 
tournament began in one eight nine nine surpassed only by ken rosewall who won 
the title in one nine seven zero at age three five agassi has also won one 
doubles title at the cincinnati masters in one nine nine three partnering petr 
korda he is one of only five male players to have won all the grand slams along 
with legends don budge roy emerson rod laver and fred perry he is in fact the 
first male tennis player to win the four grand slams on four different surfaces 
the previous players won the australian open wimbledon and the us open on grass 
courts and the french open on clay courts whereas agassi won the australian 
open on rebound ace the french open on clay wimbledon on grass and the us open 
on hardcourts after winning french open in one nine nine nine agassi became the 
first male tennis player to win the career golden slam agassi also helped the 
united states win the davis cup in one nine nine zero and one nine nine two he 
was named the bbc overseas sports personality of the year in one nine nine two 
agassi has earned more than us three zero million in prize money throughout his 
career second only to sampras in addition to this he also earns over us two 
five million a year through endorsements the most by any tennis player and 
fourth in all sports first place is tiger woods at us seven zero million a year 
two zero zero five agassi started off two zero zero five with strong runs most 
of which were cut short by roger federer he lost to federer in the 
quarterfinals of the australian open and the semifinals at dubai he reached the 
quarterfinals at indian wells after a dominant victory over guillermo coria but 
withdrew from his match with lleyton hewitt with a swollen big toe agassi lost 
in the semifinals at miami to federer in a tight match although the claycourt 
season is the toughest on the body agassi played in rome and reached the 
semifinals which he lost to coria in a tough battle at the two zero zero five 
french open agassi lost to jarkko nieminem in their first round match after 
enduring back pain related to a pinched sciatic nerve he lost in five sets with 
six zero in the fifth after much media speculation about retirement the three 
five year old agassi won in los angeles and made the final at montreal before 
falling to world no two rafael nadal in three long sets that he might have won 
if a few points had gone differently his coach darren cahill and close friend 
and personal trainer gil reyes worked with agassi throughout the summer to 
prepare for the two zero zero five us open agassi made a spectacular run at the 
open beating razvan sabau six three six three six one ivo karlovic in the 
second round seven six seven four seven six seven five seven six seven four tom 
berdych three six six one six four seven six seven two and xavier malisse six 
three six four six seven five seven four six six two his quarterfinal match 
against fellow american james blake has been called one of the best matches in 
us open history after dropping the first two sets three six three six agassi 
took the next two six three six three in the fifth set blake served for the 
match at five four but agassi broke his serve then won the tiebreak eight six 
to secure the victory at one one five a m he defeated robby ginepri another 
rising talented american with a consistent baseline game in his third 
consecutive five set match to earn a spot in the final against world no one 
roger federer after losing the first set six three agassi broke federer twice 
to win the second six two he broke federer again and at this point looked to be 
the better player agassi had a three zero love lead but with a few costly 
errors was broken to force a tiebreak which federer took seven one andre ran 
out of gas which allowed federer to reel off five straight games being down 
five zero in the fourth set agassi held to make it five one before federer 
closed it out to win the championship after the match agassi thanked new york 
for the two zero years of memories hinting at potential retirement however 
agassi has made clear that he will only retire on his terms when he feels that 
he cannot perform at his best on the court he will likely continue for another 
year as he has qualified for the two zero zero five masters cup which is 
limited to the eight best players in the world and is scheduled to play the 
lead in tournament to the two zero zero six australian open coming into the two 
zero zero five masters cup agassi is two nine five on hard courts with his only 
losses coming to roger federer and rafael nadal and is five four on clay wins 
over gasquet ljubicic and hrbaty losses to coria and lopez in two zero zero 
five agassi left nike after one seven years and signed an endorsement deal with 
adidas hampered by a third degree ankle injury caused by several torn ligaments 
agassi lost his opening match against nikolay davydenko in the masters cup and 
was forced to withdraw the withdrawal list also included rafael nadal andy 
roddick lleyton hewitt and marat safin two zero zero six agassi withdrew from 
the australian open because of an ankle injury once he withdrew he immediately 
requested a wildcard to enter the delray beach international tennis 
championships where he eventually finished as a quarterfinalist losing to 
guillermo garcia lopez four six two six he was then forced to retire from sap 
open because of a lower back injury causing him severe pain in his lower back 
and down his legs he then played in the dubai open where he won in straight 
sets over greg rusedski in the first round before losing in straights to german 
bjorn phau in second round health permitting agassi is scheduled to play 
tournaments in indian wells and miami to close out the winter hardcourt season 
agassi has officially said that he is skipping the entire clay season since it 
burdens his body he will do his best to be ready for wimbledon however agassi s 
top priority in two zero zero six will once again be making yet another run at 
the us open in august expect all scheduling decisons to be made with that goal 
in mind playing style agassi employs a baseline style of play but unlike most 
such players he typically makes contact with the ball inside the baseline 
exceptionally difficult even for professionals this is possible because of his 
short backswing which also helps him return fast serves he is also blessed with 
the best hand and eye coordination rivaled only by roger federer john mcenroe 
and others have called agassi the best service returner ever to play 
professional tennis after agassi s rededication to tennis in one nine nine 
eight he has focused more on physical conditioning than in the past and is now 
one of the fittest players on the tour his upper body strength allows him to 
bench press three five zero lbs he has remarkable endurance and rarely appears 
tired on court as long as he is not injured he handles long grueling matches 
arguably better than any other player on the tour even roger federer has been 
known to tire by the fifth set indeed agassi is often ready to start the next 
point when his opponent is catching his breath one of his strategies is to wear 
down his opponents continually putting pressure on them by returning the ball 
early and deep at angles agassi will try to stand in nearly one spot and hit 
the corners to make his opponent scramble he will often pass up the winner and 
hit a slightly less aggressive shot to make his opponent run a little more to 
retrieve a few more shots his penchant for running players around point after 
point has earned him the nickname the punisher agassi s biggest weakness 
currently is his lack of consistent speed and players who are able to 
consistently hit at sharp angles with pace give him trouble agassi used to be 
one of the fastest players on tour however his recent injuries have forced him 
to consistently run his fastest selectively usually in grand slams and tennis 
masters series events to make up for this recently adopted weakness agassi 
generally keeps his opponent on the defense federer is the only player with a 
long winning streak against agassi even sampras lost to agassi many times 
personal and family life after a four year courtship agassi married actress 
brooke shields in a lavish ceremony on april one nine one nine nine seven that 
february they had filed suit against the national enquirer claiming it printed 
false and fabricated statements brooke was undergoing counseling binge eating 
and taking pills agassi lashed into brooke and he and brooke s mother tangled 
like wildcats when she demanded a prenup the case was dismissed agassi filed 
for divorce which was granted on april nine one nine nine nine by the time the 
divorce was final agassi was dating the german tennis legend steffi graf with 
only their mothers as witnesses they were married at his home on october two 
two two zero zero one their son jaden gil was born six weeks prematurely on 
october two six that year their daughter jaz elle was born on october three two 
zero zero three agassi s older sister rita married the former tennis legend 
pancho gonzales in one nine nine five when gonzales died in las vegas andre 
paid for his brother in law s funeral andre has participated in many charity 
organizations and founded the andre agassi charitable association which assists 
the youth of las vegas in one nine nine five he has won one nine nine five s 
atp arthur ashe s humanitarian award in recognition of his efforts helping 
disadvantaged youth in la the andre agassi charitable foundation has always and 
will continue to fund organizations which offer programs that consistently 
carry out the mission of the foundation the foundation s mission is to provide 
educational and recreational institutions and activities for abandoned abused 
and at risk kids the following organizations are fine examples the andre agassi 
boys claim agassi by both the armenian and iranian communities in the united 
states and abroad agassi has often seemed somewhat ambivalent for example 
joking after his all armenian match against sargis sargsian at the us open in 
two zero zero four well i m only half armenian though he agreed to appear in a 
pbs documentary about armenian americans his father has written in his book the 
agassi story about his experience of being an outsider in muslim iran but andre 
has also shown interest in the iranian aspect of his heritage in february two 
zero zero five expressing a desire to visit iran which holds a special place in 
his heart quotes about pete sampras retirement you grow up with a guy you 
compete against him for so long he s such a big part of your career something 
that s pretty special so you do have that sense of personal regret that he s 
not around any more you miss having that around during the two zero zero five 
us open i ve been motivated by overcoming challenge and overcoming the hurdles 
and obstacles that face me there still is plenty out there to get motivated by 
from mats wilander asked to name the top five tennis players of all time he 
placed agassi sampras federer and borg in the top four in no order and tied 
mcenroe lendl and connors for fifth place on agassi he has some limitations 
like he can t serve and volley yet he has won all four slams he has a very high 
energy level quite like borg he is on fifth gear from the very first point 
there is some abnormality in his eyes otherwise he wouldn t have had such a 
phenomenal return he sees the ball like none else and just guides it wherever 
he wants to he s just played a grand slam final at three five that tells me he 
wasted the first five years of his career otherwise he couldn t have lasted 
this long no one has done more to tennis than agassi and borg video games andre 
agassi tennis for the snes sega genesis game gear and mobile phone agassi 
tennis generation for ps two and gba smash court pro tournament for ps two 
grand slam record australian open singles champion one nine nine five two zero 
zero zero two zero zero one two zero zero three singles semi finalist one nine 
nine six two zero zero four singles quarter finalist two zero zero five french 
open singles champion one nine nine nine singles finalist one nine nine zero 
one nine nine one singles semi finalist one nine eight eight one nine nine two 
singles quarter finalist one nine nine five two zero zero one two zero zero two 
two zero zero three doubles quarter finalist one nine nine two wimbledon 
singles champion one nine nine two singles finalist one nine nine nine singles 
semi finalist one nine nine five two zero zero zero two zero zero one singles 
quarter finalist one nine nine one one nine nine three u s open singles 
champion one nine nine four one nine nine nine singles finalist one nine nine 
zero one nine nine five two zero zero two two zero zero five singles semi 
finalist one nine eight eight one nine eight nine one nine nine six two zero 
zero three singles quarter finalist one nine nine two two zero zero one two 
zero zero four grand slam finals wins eight year championship opponent in final 
score in final one nine nine two wimbledon goran ivani evi six seven six four 
six four one six six four one nine nine four us open michael stich six one 
seven six seven five one nine nine five australian open pete sampras four six 
six one seven six six four one nine nine nine french open andrei medvedev one 
six two six six four six three six four one nine nine nine us open todd martin 
six four six seven six seven six three six two two zero zero zero australian 
open yevgeny kafelnikov three six six three six two six four two zero zero one 
australian open arnaud clement six four six two six two two zero zero three 
australian open rainer schuettler six two six two six one runner ups seven year 
championship opponent in final score in final one nine nine zero french open 
andres gomez six three two six six four six four one nine nine zero us open 
pete sampras six four six three six two one nine nine one french open jim 
courier three six six four two six six one six four one nine nine five us open 
pete sampras six four six three four six seven five one nine nine nine 
wimbledon pete sampras six three six four seven five two zero zero two us open 
pete sampras six three six four five seven six four two zero zero five us open 
roger federer six three two six seven six six one famous matches us open 
quarterfinal one nine eight nine defeated jimmy connors six one four six zero 
six six three six four agassi s first five set win at one point during a 
changeover agassi joked to his box that he was losing sets on purpose to prove 
that he could win in five the previous time he played connors was at the one 
nine eight eight us open quarterfinal in which he beat connors convincingly and 
did not lose a set french open final one nine nine zero lost to andr s g mez 
six three two six six four six four agassi s first grand slam final us open 
final one nine nine zero lost to pete sampras six four six three six two the 
first of five grand slam finals contested by the top two players of their 
generation french open final one nine nine one lost to jim courier six three 
four six six two one six four six blew two sets to one lead after rain delay 
many questioned if agassi had the heart to win a major championship wimbledon 
final one nine nine two defeated goran ivani evi six seven eight six four six 
four one six six four agassi s first grand slam title occurring at the 
tournament no one thought he could ever win still his only wimbledon 
championship wimbledon quarterfinal one nine nine three lost to pete sampras 
six two six two three six three six six four the first of only two five set 
matches between the two the other was the two zero zero zero australian open 
semis us open four th round one nine nine four defeated michael chang six one 
six seven three six three three six six one outlasts chang en route to becoming 
the first unseeded man to win the us open championship in two eight years 
knocked off five seeded players along the way first us open title australian 
open one nine nine five final defeated pete sampras four six six one seven six 
six six four agassi s only grand slam final victory over sampras atlanta summer 
olympics gold medal match one nine nine six defeated serge bruguera six two six 
three six one demolished two time french open champion to achieve important 
personal goal of winning an olympic gold medal french open one st round lost to 
marat safin seven five five seven two six six three two six in what was the 
russian s first grand slam match safin s win foreshadowed his win over pete 
sampras in the two zero zero zero us open final french open final one nine nine 
nine defeated andrei medvedev one six two six six four six three six four a 
spectacular come from behind victory that completed his career grand slam at 
the advanced age of two nine and his return to the top of tennis after being as 
low as one four one referred to as the miracle in paris agassi has stated that 
he considers this his greatest moment on a tennis court us open final one nine 
nine nine defeated todd martin six four six seven five six seven two six three 
six two another come from behind thriller australian open two zero zero zero 
semi final defeated pete sampras six four three six six seven zero seven six 
five six one en route to his second australian open crown tennis magazine 
stated this was sampras agassi for the ages wimbledon semi final two zero zero 
zero lost to patrick rafter seven five four six seven five four six six three 
this match was universally praised for its asthetic beauty as the world s 
greatest baseliner battled the game s most fluid and athletic volleyer over 
five tense sets australian open two zero zero one semi final defeated patrick 
rafter seven five two six six seven five six two six three exacted some revenge 
for two zero zero zero wimbledon semi loss to rafter rallied from two sets to 
one down to stun rafter in front of an energized australian crowd wimbledon 
semi final two zero zero one lost to patrick rafter two six six three three six 
six two eight six although not considered possible the rematch topped the 
standard set by their encounter from the year before us open two zero zero one 
quarter final lost to pete sampras six seven nine seven six two seven six two 
seven six five match featured no breaks of serve many consider this the best 
agassi sampras match played us open two zero zero two final lost to pete 
sampras six three six four five seven six four sampras final competitive match 
french open two zero zero three two nd round defeated mario ancic five seven 
one six six four six two seven five rallied back from two sets to love against 
the young and powerful ancic to win the match one of only six matches agassi 
has won after being down two sets to love three of them have been at the french 
open french open two zero zero four one st round lost to jerome haehnel four 
six six seven four three six shock first round loss to lowly french career 
journeyman arguably the greatest upset in french open history us open two zero 
zero four quarter final lost to roger federer three six six two five seven six 
three three six five th set marred by record breaking winds by far roger 
federer s most difficult match en route to the title australian open two zero 
zero five four th round defeated joachim johansson six seven four seven six 
five seven six three six four won despite johansson s world record five one 
aces french open two zero zero five one st round lost to jarkko nieminen five 
seven six four seven six one six zero six possibly agassi s last match at the 
french open he led two sets to one heading into the fourth set but a pinched 
sciatic nerve hampered agasi s movement very noticeably agassi limped off the 
court with tears in his eyes after the match the match was a major indicator to 
many that agassi s career might be coming to a close soon us open two zero zero 
five quarter final defeated james blake three six three six six three six three 
seven six six agassi had never come back from two sets down in the us open this 
was called the best match of the two zero zero five open and one of the best in 
us open history us open two zero zero five semi final defeated robby ginepri in 
his third consecutive five set thriller six four five seven six three four six 
six three at three five years old he played his best tennis in the fifth set us 
open two zero zero five final lost to roger federer in his sixth us open final 
in the finale of agassi s magic run at the open which included three five set 
matches in a row agassi met federer and appeared to have the upper hand being 
up a break in the third set with the match tied at one set each however federer 
withstood the pressure and rallied to beat agassi six three two six seven six 
one six one tennis masters cup two zero zero five round robin lost to nikolay 
davydenko six four six two agassi was suffering from a sprained ankle injured 
while he was playing racquetball three weeks before although the match itself 
was unremarkable the afterward was when one of the tournament organizers 
absurdly accused agassi of faking injury and losing on purpose because he 
agassi was playing in shanghai it turned out that the same injury would cause 
agassi to withdraw the two zero zero six australian open titles six zero 
singles six zero doubles one performance timeline head to head vs sampras pete 
one four two zero vs roddick andy five one vs ginepri robby four zero vs blake 
james four one vs dent taylor five zero vs kiefer nicolas six zero vs rusedski 
greg eight two vs henman tim two one vs johansson thomas six one vs novak jiri 
five one vs gaudio gaston four one vs davydenko nikolay two one vs coria 
guillermo five two vs chang michael one five seven vs ivanisevic goran four 
three vs rafter patrick one zero five vs connors jimmy two zero vs mcenroe john 
two two vs becker boris one zero four vs safin marat three three vs hewitt 
lleyton four four vs courier jim five seven vs muster thomas five four vs 
federer roger three eight vs nadal rafael zero one vs grosjean sebastien four 
three vs nalbandian david one zero vs ferrero juan carlos two three vs kuerten 
gustavo seven four vs corretja alex five three vs costa albert four one vs moya 
carlos three one vs malisse xavier five zero vs pioline cedric three zero vs 
haas tommy six three external links official atp profile profile on 
tenniscorner net davis cup record andre agassi foundation ioc profile agassi 
open one nine seven zero births living people american tennis players tennis 
players at the one nine nine six summer olympics armenian americans iranian 
americans las vegans australian open champions french open champions wimbledon 
champions us open champions list of assyrians austro asiatic languages the 
austro asiatic languages are a large language family of southeast asia and 
india the name comes from the greek words for south asia among these languages 
only vietnamese khmer and mon have a long recorded history and only vietnamese 
and khmer have official status in vietnam and cambodia respectively the rest of 
the languages are spoken by minority groups austroasiatic languages have a 
disjunct distribution across india and southeast asia separated by regions 
where other languages are spoken it is widely believed that the austroasiatic 
languages are the autochthonous languages of southeast asia and eastern india 
and that the other languages of the region including the indo european tai 
kadai and sino tibetan languages are the result of later migrations of people 
there are for example austroasiatic words in the tibeto burman languages of 
eastern nepal some linguists have attempted to prove that austroasiatic 
languages are related to austronesian languages thus forming the austric 
superfamily linguists traditionally recognize two major divisions of 
austroasiatic the mon khmer languages of southeast asia and the munda languages 
of east central and central india ethnologue identifies one six eight 
austroasiatic languages of which one four seven are mon khmer languages and two 
one are munda languages however no evidence for this classification has ever 
been published and it remains speculative each of the subdivisions of the 
classification below that is written in boldface type is accepted as a valid 
family however the relationships between these families within austroasiatic is 
debated it should be noted that little of the data used for competing 
classifications has ever been published and therefore cannot be evaluated by 
peer review the classification used here is that of diffloth in press which 
does not accept traditional mon khmer as a valid unit munda languages india 
koraput seven languages core munda languages kharian juang two languages north 
munda languages korku one language kherwarian one two languages khasi khmuic 
languages khasian three languages of eastern india and bangladesh palaungo 
khmuic languages khmuic one three languages of laos and thailand palaungo 
pakanic languages pakanic or palyu two languages of southern china palaungic 
two one languages of myanmar southern china and thailand plus mang of vietnam 
mon khmer languages khmero vietic languages vieto katuic languages viet muong 
or vietic one zero languages of vietnam and laos includes the vietnamese 
language which has the most speakers of any austroasiatic language these are 
the only austroasiatic languages to have highly developed tone systems katuic 
one nine languages of laos vietnam and thailand khmero bahnaric languages 
bahnaric four zero languages of vietnam laos and cambodia khmeric languages the 
khmer language of cambodia thailand and vietnam pearic six languages of 
cambodia nico monic languages nicobarese languages six languages of the nicobar 
islands a territory of india asli monic languages aslian one nine languages of 
peninsular malaysia and thailand monic two languages includes the mon language 
of myanmar and the nyahkur language of thailand there are in addition several 
unclassified languages of southern china austro asiatic languages map showing 
the distribution of afro asiatic languages the afro asiatic languages 
constitute a language family of about two four zero languages and over three 
zero seven million people widespread throughout north africa east africa the 
sahel and southwest asia other names sometimes given to this family include 
afrasian hamito semitic deprecated lisramic hodge one nine seven two erythraean 
tucker one nine six six the following language subfamilies are included berber 
languages chadic languages egyptian languages semitic languages cushitic 
languages beja language subclassification controversial widely classified as 
part of cushitic omotic languages controversial sometimes argued to be outside 
afro asiatic the ongota language is often considered afro asiatic but its 
classification within the family remains controversial partly for lack of data 
harold fleming tentatively suggests that it is an independent branch of non 
omotic afro asiatic it is not generally agreed on where proto afro asiatic was 
spoken africa e g igor diakonoff lionel bender has often been suggested 
particularly ethiopia because it includes the majority of the diversity of the 
afro asiatic language family and has very diverse groups in close geographic 
proximity often considered a telltale sign for a linguistic geographic origin 
the western red sea coast and the sahara have also been put forward e g 
christopher ehret alexander militarev suggests that their homeland was in the 
levant specifically he identifies them with the natufian culture the semitic 
languages are the only afro asiatic subfamily based outside of africa however 
in historical or near historical times some semitic speakers crossed from south 
arabia back into ethiopia so some modern ethiopian languages such as amharic 
are semitic rather than belonging to the substrate cushitic or omotic groups a 
minority of academics e g a murtonen one nine six seven dispute this view 
suggesting that semitic may have originated in ethiopia tonal languages are 
found in the omotic chadic and south build ehret b n attested in chadic semitic 
bny cushitic m n m n house and omotic dime bin build create m t die ehret maaw 
attested in chadic eg hausa mutu egyptian mwt mt coptic mu berber mmet pr 
yemmut semitic mwt and cushitic proto somali umaaw am w t die also similar to 
the latin mortis indicating a possible vocabulary drift s n know attested in 
chadic berber and egyptian l s tongue ehret lis to lick attested in semitic 
lasaan lisaan egyptian ns coptic las berber ils chadic eg hausa harshe and 
possibly omotic dime lits lick s m name ehret s m s m attested in semitic sm 
berber ism chadic eg hausa suna cushitic and omotic though the berber form ism 
and the omotic form sunts are sometimes argued to be semitic loanwords the 
egyptian smi report announce may also be cognate d m blood ehret d m d m 
attested in berber idammen semitic dam chadic and arguably omotic cushitic d m 
d m red may be cognate in the verbal system semitic berber and cushitic 
including beja all provide evidence for a prefix conjugation a causative affix 
s is widespread found in all its subfamilies but is also found in other groups 
such as the niger congo languages the possessive pronoun suffixes are supported 
by semitic berber cushitic including beja and chadic classification history 
medieval scholars sometimes linked two or more branches of afro asiatic 
together already in the nine th century the hebrew grammarian judah ibn quraysh 
of tiaret algeria perceived a relationship between berber and semitic the 
latter being known to him through arabic hebrew and aramaic in the one eight 
zero zero s europeans began suggesting such relationships thus in one eight 
four four th benfey suggested a language family containing semitic berber and 
cushitic calling the latter ethiopic in the same year t n newman suggested a 
relationship between semitic and hausa but this would long remain a topic of 
dispute and uncertainty the traditional hamito semitic family was named by 
friedrich m ller in one eight seven six in his grundriss der sprachwissenschaft 
and defined as consisting of a semitic group plus a hamitic group containing 
egyptian berber and cushitic the chadic group was not included these 
classifications were partly based on non linguistic anthropological and racial 
arguments see also hamitic hypothesis leo reinisch one nine zero nine proposed 
to link cushitic and chadic while urging a more distant affinity with egyptian 
and semitic thus foreshadowing greenberg but his suggestion was largely ignored 
marcel cohen one nine two four rejected the idea of a distinct hamitic subgroup 
and included hausa a chadic language in his comparative hamito semitic 
vocabulary joseph greenberg one nine five zero strongly confirmed cohen s 
rejection of hamitic added and sub classified the chadic languages and proposed 
the new name afro asiatic for the family his classification of it came to be 
almost universally accepted in one nine six nine harold fleming proposed the 
recognition of omotic as a fifth branch rather than as previously believed a 
subgroup of cushitic and this has become generally accepted several scholars 
including harold fleming and robert hetzron have since questioned the 
traditional inclusion of beja in cushitic but this view has yet to gain general 
acceptance there is little agreement on the subclassification of the five or 
six branches mentioned however christopher ehret one nine seven nine harold 
fleming one nine eight one and joseph greenberg one nine eight one all agree 
that omotic was the first branch to split from the rest otherwise ehret groups 
egyptian berber and semitic together in a north afro asiatic subgroup paul 
newman one nine eight zero groups berber with chadic and egyptian with semitic 
while questioning the inclusion of omotic fleming one nine eight one divided 
non omotic afroasiatic or erythraean into three groups cushitic semitic and 
chadic berber egyptian he later added semitic and beja to the latter and 
proposed ongot as a tentative new third branch of erythraean lionel bender one 
nine nine seven advocates a macro cushitic consisting of berber cushitic and 
semitic while regarding chadic and omotic as the most remote branches vladimir 
orel and olga stolbova one nine nine five group berber with semitic chadic with 
egyptian and split cushitic into five or more independent branches of afro 
asiatic seeing cushitic as a sprachbund rather than a valid family alexander 
militarev two zero zero zero on the basis of lexicostatistics groups berber 
with chadic and both more distantly with semitic as against cushitic and omotic 
see also african languages etymological bibliography some of the main sources 
for afro asiatic etymologies include marcel cohen essai comparatif sur la 
vocabulaire et la phon tique du chamito s mitique champion paris one nine four 
seven igor m diakonoff et al historical comparative vocabulary of afrasian st 
petersburg journal of african studies nos two six one nine nine three seven 
christopher ehret reconstructing proto afroasiatic proto afrasian vowels tone 
consonants and vocabulary university of california publications in linguistics 
one two six california berkeley one nine nine six vladimir e orel and olga v 
stolbova hamito semitic etymological dictionary materials for a reconstruction 
brill leiden one nine nine five isbn nine zero zero four one zero zero five one 
two sources bernd heine and derek nurse african languages cambridge university 
press two zero zero zero chapter four merritt ruhlen a guide to the world s 
languages stanford university press stanford one nine nine one lionel bender et 
al selected comparative historical afro asiatic studies in memory of igor m 
diakonoff lincom two zero zero three ethnologue russell g schuh chadic overview 
african language history pdf roger blench external links a comparison of orel 
stolbova s and ehret s afro asiatic reconstructions the origins of afroasiatic 
by paul newman requires science magazine subscription afro asiatic languages 
align center colspan two national motto virtus unita fortior latin virtue 
united is stronger align center colspan two official language catalan capital 
population coordinates andorra la vella two two zero three five one nine nine 
zero est french co prince jacques chirac episcopal co prince joan enric vives 
sic lia head of government albert pintat area total water ranked one seven 
eight th four six eight km negligible population total two zero zero three 
density ranked one eight two nd six nine one five zero one four four five km 
independence one two seven eight national day eight september valign top 
religions roman catholic established religion hdi two zero zero three na 
unranked currency euro one zero zero cents time zone in summer cet utc one cest 
utc two valign top national anthem el gran carlemany mon pare internet tld ad 
calling code three seven six colspan two align center one prior to one nine 
nine nine french franc and spanish peseta some of their own currency one diner 
of one zero zero centim was minted after one nine eight two the principality of 
andorra catalan principat d andorra french principaut d andorre spanish 
principado de andorra is a small landlocked principality in south western 
europe located in the eastern pyrenees mountains and bordered by france and 
spain once isolated it is currently a prosperous country mainly because of 
tourism and its status as a tax haven andorra is not to be confused with the 
comune di andora origin and history of the name the name andorra probably 
originates from a navarrese word andurrial which translates as shrub covered 
land history tradition holds that charlemagne granted a charter to the andorran 
people in return for their fighting the moors overlordship of the territory 
passed to the local count of urgell and eventually to the bishop of the diocese 
of urgell in the one one th century a dispute arose between the bishop and his 
northern french neighbour over andorra in one two seven eight the conflict was 
resolved by the signing of a parage which provided that andorra s sovereignty 
be shared between the french count of foix whose title would ultimately 
transfer to the french head of state and the bishop of la seu d urgell in 
catalonia this gave the small principality its territory and political form 
over the years the title passed to the kings of navarre after henry of navarre 
became king henry iv of france he issued an edict one six zero seven that 
established the head of the french state and the bishop of urgell as co princes 
of andorra in the period one eight one two one three the french empire annexed 
catalonia and divided it in four departments andorra was also annexed and made 
part of the district of puigcerd d partement of s gre in one nine three three 
france occupied andorra as a result of social unrest before elections on july 
one two one nine three four an adventurer named boris skossyreff issued a 
proclamation in urgel declaring himself boris i sovereign prince of andorra 
simultaneously declaring war on the bishop of urgel he was arrested by spanish 
authorities on july two zero and ultimately expelled from spain from one nine 
three six to one nine four zero a french detachment was garrisoned in andorra 
to prevent influences of the spanish civil war and franco s spain the franco 
troops reached the andorran border in the later stages of the war during the 
second world war andorra remained neutral and was an important smuggling route 
between vichy france and spain in one nine five eight andorra declared peace 
with germany having been forgotten on the treaty of versailles that ended the 
first world war and remaining legally at war given its relative isolation 
andorra has existed outside the mainstream of european history with few ties to 
countries other than france and spain in recent times however its thriving 
tourist industry along with developments in transportation and communications 
have removed the country from its isolation and its political system was 
thoroughly modernized in one nine nine three the year in which it finally 
became a member of the united nations politics until very recently andorra s 
political system had no clear division of powers into executive legislative and 
judicial branches ratified and approved in one nine nine three the constitution 
establishes andorra as a sovereign parliamentary democracy that retains the co 
princes as heads of state but the head of government retains executive power 
the two co princes serve coequally with limited powers that do not include veto 
over government acts they are represented in andorra by a delegate the way in 
which the two princes are chosen makes andorra one of the most politically 
distinct nations on earth one co prince is the man or woman who is currently 
serving as president of france currently jacques chirac it has historically 
been any head of state of france including kings and emperors of france the 
other is the current catholic bishop of the catalan city of la seu d urgell 
currently joan enric vives i sicilia as neither prince lives in andorra their 
role is almost entirely ceremonial andorra s main legislative body is the 
unicameral general council of the valleys consell general de les valls a 
parliament of two eight seats members are elected by direct popular vote one 
four from a single national constituency and one four to represent each of the 
seven parishes with members serving four year terms the andorran government is 
formed by the general council electing the head of government cap de govern who 
then appoints ministers to the cabinet the executive council govern currently 
government is held by the liberal party of andorra with albert pintat as prime 
minister the social democratic party is in opposition defense of the country is 
the responsibility of france and spain administrative divisions map of andorra 
andorra consists of seven communities known as parr quies singular parr quia 
engl parish andorra la vella canillo encamp escaldes engordany la massana 
ordino sant juli de l ria geography befitting its location in the eastern 
pyrenees mountain range andorra consists predominantly of rugged mountains of 
an average height of one nine nine six m with the highest being the coma 
pedrosa at two nine four six m these are dissected by three narrow valleys in a 
y shape that combine into one as the main stream the valira river leaves the 
country for spain at andorra s lowest point of eight seven zero m andorra s 
climate is similar to its neighbours temperate climate but its higher altitude 
means there is on average more snow in winter and it is slightly cooler in 
summer economy andorra la vella tourism the mainstay of andorra s tiny well to 
do economy accounts for roughly eight zero of gdp an estimated nine million 
tourists visit annually attracted by andorra s duty free status and by its 
summer and winter resorts andorra s comparative advantage has recently eroded 
as the economies of adjoining france and spain have been opened up providing 
broader availability of goods and lower tariffs the banking sector with its tax 
haven status also contributes substantially to the economy agricultural 
production is limited only two of the land is arable and most food has to be 
imported the principal livestock activity is domestic sheep raising 
manufacturing output consists mainly of cigarettes cigars and furniture andorra 
is not a full member of the european union but enjoys a special relationship 
with it such as being treated as an eu member for trade in manufactured goods 
no tariffs and as a non eu member for agricultural products andorra lacks a 
currency of its own and uses that of its two surrounding nations prior to one 
nine nine nine these were the french franc and the spanish peseta which have 
since been replaced by a single currency the euro unlike other small european 
states that use the euro andorra does not yet mint its own euro coins in 
october two zero zero four negotiations between andorra and the eu began on an 
agreement which would allow andorra to mint its own coins andorra s natural 
resources include hydropower mineral water timber iron ore and lead 
demographics andorrans constitute a minority in their own country only three 
three of inhabitants hold andorran nationality the largest group of foreign 
nationals is that of spaniards four three with portuguese one one and french 
seven nationals the other main groups the remaining six belong to several other 
nationalities the only official language is catalan the language of the nearby 
spanish autonomous region of catalonia with which andorra shares many cultural 
traits though spanish portuguese and french are also commonly spoken the 
predominant religion is roman catholicism culture andorra s long history has 
provided it with a rich mythology and an abundance of folk tales with roots 
originating in as far as andalusia in the south and netherlands in the north 
miscellaneous topics communications in andorra civil unions in andorra foreign 
relations of andorra postal services in andorra tourism in andorra 
transportation in andorra see also list of sovereign states external links 
andorra ad main portal andorra intern andorra inside information andorra online 
information on various andorran topics andorra mania information on various 
andorran topics cia the world factbook andorra cia s factbook on andorra 
financial institutions in andorra govern d andorra official governmental site 
in catalan library of congress portals on the world andorra andorra in 
mathematics and statistics the arithmetic mean of a set of numbers is the sum 
of all the members of the set divided by the number of items in the set 
cardinality the word set is used perhaps somewhat loosely for example the 
number three eight could occur more than once in such a set if one particular 
number occurs more times than others in the set it is called a mode the 
arithmetic mean is what pupils are taught very early to call the average if the 
set is a statistical population then we speak of the population mean if the set 
is a statistical sample we call the resulting statistic a sample mean when the 
mean is not an accurate estimate of the median the set of numbers or frequency 
distribution is said to be skewed the symbol greek mu is used to denote the 
arithmetic mean of a population if we denote a set of data by x then the sample 
mean is typically denoted with a horizontal bar over the variable x generally 
enunciated x bar in practice the difference between and x is that is typically 
unobservable because one observes only a sample rather than the whole 
population and if the sample is drawn randomly then one may treat x but not as 
a random variable attributing a probability distribution to it both are 
computed in the same way mathrm bar x one cdots x n n the arithmetic mean is 
greatly influenced by outliers for instance reporting the average net worth in 
redmond washington as the arithmetic mean of all annual net worths would yield 
a surprisingly high number because of bill gates these distortions occur when 
the mean is different from the median and the median is a superior alternative 
when that happens in certain situations the arithmetic mean is the wrong 
concept of average altogether for example if a stock rose one zero in the first 
year three zero in the second year and fell one zero in the third year then it 
would be incorrect to report its average increase per year over this three year 
period as the arithmetic mean one zero three zero one zero three one zero the 
correct average in this case is the geometric mean which yields an average 
increase per year of only eight eight if x is a random variable then the 
expected value of x can be seen as the long term arithmetic mean that occurs on 
repeated measurements of x this is the content of the law of large numbers as a 
result the sample mean is used to estimate unknown expected values note that 
several other means have been defined including the generalized mean the 
generalized f mean the harmonic mean the arithmetic geometric mean and the 
weighted mean alternate notations the arithmetic mean may also be expressed 
using the sum notation bar frac one n sum n x i see also mean average summary 
statistics variance central tendency standard deviation inequality of 
arithmetic and geometric means muirhead s inequality external links 
calculations and comparisons between arithmetic and geometric mean between two 
numbers arithmetic and geometric means cut the knot statistics means american 
football conference the american football conference afc is one of the two 
conferences of the national football league nfl the afc was created after the 
league merged with the american football league afl in early one nine seven 
zero the nfl s cleveland browns pittsburgh steelers and the then baltimore 
colts agreed to join the new afc along with the one zero former afl teams all 
of the other nfl teams formed the national football conference nfc initially 
this alignment proved to be very unpopular with fans in these cities the afc 
logo shown to the right is a variation of the old afl logo as seen here 
introduced in one nine seven zero alongside the beginning of the new afc the 
logo has basically remained unchanged since its introduction though the a wasn 
t as bold when it was first introduced the afc currently consists of one six 
teams organized into four divisions north south east and west of four teams 
each each team plays the other teams in their division twice home and away 
during the regular season in addition to one zero other games teams assigned to 
their schedule by the nfl the previous may two of these games are assigned on 
the basis of the team s final record in the previous season the remaining eight 
games are split between the roster of two other nfl divisions this assignment 
shifts each year for instance in the two zero zero six regular season each team 
in the afc east will play a game apiece against each team in both the afc south 
and the nfc north in this way division competition consists of common opponents 
with the exception of the two games assigned on the strength of each team s 
prior season record the nfc operates according to the same system at the end of 
each football season there are playoff games involving the top six teams in the 
afc the four division champions by place standing and the top two remaining non 
division champion teams wild cards by record the last two teams remaining play 
in the afc championship game with the winner receiving the lamar hunt trophy 
the afc champion plays the nfc champion in the super bowl national football 
league there have been two united states politicians named albert arnold gore 
the father albert gore sr was a senator from tennessee from one nine five three 
to one nine seven one the son albert gore jr often called simply al gore was 
both a representative and a senator from tennessee and was both a u s vice 
president and a presidential candidate this article is about the former united 
states vice president for his father see albert gore sr albert arnold gore jr 
born march three one one nine four eight is an american politician and 
businessman who served as the four five th vice president of the united states 
from one nine nine three to two zero zero one he ran for president in two zero 
zero zero following bill clinton s two four year terms he was defeated in the 
electoral college vote by the republican candidate george w bush on a vote of 
two seven one two six six with a gore committed elector from washington dc 
abstaining however gore did receive more individual votes than bush the 
election was bitterly contested including multiple recounts and a five four 
supreme court decision that effectively secured the election for president 
george w bush gore currently serves as president of the american television 
channel current and chairman of generation investment management sits on the 
board of directors of apple computer and serves as an unofficial advisor to 
google s senior management although speculation about a possible presidential 
run in two zero zero eight still continues he has stated that he does not 
currently plan to return to politics but doesn t rule this possibility out in 
the future early life he attended the sheridan school and later the elite st 
albans school in one nine six five gore enrolled at harvard college where he 
majored in government his roommates in dunster house were actor tommy lee jones 
and former columbia university women s basketball star katie day s father bart 
day gore graduated from harvard in june one nine six nine with a bachelor of 
arts degree for more information on gore s academic records see family al gore 
was born in washington d c to albert a gore sr a politician and pauline lafon 
gore one of the first female lawyers to graduate from vanderbilt law school 
since his father was a veteran democratic senator from tennessee al gore jr 
divided his childhood between washington d c and carthage tennessee during the 
school year the younger gore lived in a hotel in washington during summer 
vacations he lived in carthage where he worked on the gore family farm in one 
nine seven zero gore married mary elizabeth aitcheson tipper gore whom he had 
first met many years before at his high school senior prom st albans school in 
washington d c they have four children karenna born august six one nine seven 
three married to drew schiff kristin born june five one nine seven seven sarah 
born january seven one nine seven nine and al iii born october one nine one 
nine eight two the gores also have two grandchildren wyatt born july four one 
nine nine nine and anna schiff the gores now reside in nashville tennessee usa 
and own a small farm near carthage tennessee the family attends new salem 
missionary baptist church in carthage the gores in late two zero zero five 
bought a condo at san francisco s swanky st regis soldier and journalist gore 
served as a field reporter in vietnam for four months although opposed to the 
vietnam war on august seven one nine six nine gore enlisted in the army to 
participate in the vietnam war effort after completing training as a military 
journalist gore shipped to vietnam in early one nine seven one serving for four 
months before being given an honorable discharge the chronology of gore s 
military service is as follows august one nine six nine enlisted at the newark 
new jersey recruiting office august to october one nine six nine eight weeks of 
basic training at fort dix new jersey late october one nine six nine to 
december one nine seven zero fort rucker alabama on the job occupational 
training at the army flier newspaper january one nine seven one to may one nine 
seven one field reporter in vietnam part of the two zero th engineer brigade 
stationed primarily at bien hoa air base near saigon may two four one nine 
seven one given an honorable discharge after his early discharge request was 
granted gore stated many times that he opposed the vietnam war but chose to 
enlist anyway some observers have noted that gore could have avoided vietnam in 
a number of ways gore considered all these options but said that his sense of 
civic duty compelled him to serve alexander cockburn and jeffrey st clair 
suggest in al gore a user s manual that gore joined the military for political 
gain because gore served as a journalist he was never exposed to front line 
combat although some allege that his famous father s influence helped him to 
obtain this position most military analysts agree that any man who enlisted 
with a harvard degree had a good chance of being assigned a support specialty 
rather than an infantry position even at the war s height eight eight of all 
servicemen were assigned to noncombatant specialties however gore s decision to 
enlist for a two year term did mean that he would not be able to select his 
assignment a choice which was available to three year enlistees according to 
newsweek journalist bill turque s biography inventing al gore which does not 
shy away from criticism and scandals such as charging gore with smoking 
marijuana far more frequently than he admits dess stokes staff sergeant at the 
newark armed forces entrance and examination station on the day he walked in 
doesn t remember any communication from superiors about gore a kid with gore s 
background a one three four iq and a harvard degree he said didn t need to be a 
senator s son with high level contacts to get the military job he wanted gore s 
father al gore sr lost the one nine seven zero election and was no longer a 
senator by the time gore arrived in vietnam but was a senator until january one 
nine seven one which included the time his son would have received his 
assignment some critics charge that his father s stature led gore s superiors 
to give him less dangerous assignments than they might otherwise have given him 
according to combat photographer h alan leo gore was protected from dangerous 
situations at the request of brigadier general kenneth b cooper the two zero th 
engineer brigades commander leo stated that gore s trips into the field were 
safe and that gore could have worn a tuxedo these remarks seem to contradict 
gore s many public statements i carried an m one six i pulled my turn on the 
perimeter at night and walked through the elephant grass and i was fired upon 
baltimore sun i took my turn regularly on the perimeter in these little 
firebases out in the boonies something would move we d fire first and ask 
questions later vanity fair i was shot at i spent most of my time in the field 
washington post i used to fly these things combat helicopters with the doors 
open sitting on the ledge with our feet hanging down if you flew low and fast 
they wouldn t have as much time to shoot you weekly standard for his part gore 
has stated that he knew leo but rarely traveled with him in vietnam and that he 
never felt that he was being given special protection on the other hand leo s 
testimony is that cooper gave the orders before gore arrived so gore would not 
know about them the question of whether leo frequently traveled with gore or 
not still has not been conclusively answered turque s book however states that 
cooper said that he has no recollection of even meeting leo much less 
discussing gore s safety with him the evidence indicates that if there was an 
official effort to guarantee gore s safety it was uneven at best his clippings 
from the castle courier the newspaper of the u s army engineering command and 
other publications suggest that he pulled his weight which in his case meant 
choppering around to report features about the good works of the two zero th 
engineers when smith said he was scheduled to leave for r r in hawaii the 
sergeant called for volunteers gore stepped up and spent a cold night in a 
foxhole al did what everybody else did said mike o hara the photographer who 
shot the khe sanh assignment regulations allowed for early release of personnel 
to teach or attend school if their services were deemed not essential to the 
mission and gore certainly qualified gore stated in one nine eight eight that 
his experience in vietnam didn t change my conclusions about the war being a 
terrible mistake but it struck me that opponents to the war including myself 
really did not take into account the fact that there were an awful lot of south 
vietnamese who desperately wanted to hang on to what they called freedom coming 
face to face with those sentiments expressed by people who did the laundry and 
ran the restaurants and worked in the fields was something i was naively 
unprepared for after returning from vietnam gore spent five years as a reporter 
for the tennessean a newspaper headquartered in nashville tennessee during this 
time gore also attended vanderbilt divinity school and law school although he 
did not complete a degree at either congress al gore speaks during a 
congressional hearing in the one nine eight zero s in the spring of one nine 
seven six gore quit law school to run for the u s house in tennessee s fourth 
district gore defeated stanley rogers in the democratic primary then ran 
unopposed and was elected to his first congressional post he was re elected 
three times in one nine seven eight one nine eight zero and one nine eight two 
in one nine eight four gore did not run for the house instead he successfully 
ran for a seat in the senate which had been vacated by republican majority 
leader howard baker gore served as a senator from tennessee until one nine nine 
three when he became vice president house of representatives on march one nine 
one nine seven nine gore became the first person to appear on c span making a 
speech in the house chambers senate one nine eight eight presidential run in 
one nine eight eight gore ran for president but failed to obtain the democratic 
nomination which went instead to michael dukakis son s accident and effect on 
one nine nine two presidential run on april three one nine eight nine gore s 
six year old son albert was nearly killed in an automobile accident while 
leaving the baltimore orioles opening game because of this and the resulting 
lengthy healing process his father chose to stay near him during the recovery 
instead of laying the foundation for a presidential primary campaign against 
eventual nominee bill clinton gore started writing earth in the balance his 
book on environmental conservation during his son s recovery earth in the 
balance became the first book written by a sitting senator to make the new york 
times best seller list since john f kennedy s profiles in courage congressional 
committees while in congress gore was a member of the following committees 
armed services defense industry and technology projection forces and regional 
defense strategic forces and nuclear deterrence commerce science and 
transportation communications consumer science technology and space chairman 
one nine nine two surface transportation national ocean policy study joint 
committee on printing joint economic committee rules and administration vice 
presidency vice president talking with president clinton as the two pass 
through the colonnade at the white house bill clinton chose gore to be his 
running mate on july nine one nine nine two to the surprise of many as the two 
were both young and were from the same region of the nation after winning the 
one nine nine two election al gore was inaugurated as the four five th vice 
president of the united states on january two zero one nine nine three clinton 
and gore were re elected to a second term in the one nine nine six election 
during his time as vice president al gore was mostly a behind the scenes player 
however many experts consider him to be one of the most active and influential 
vice presidents in u s history this was evident as gore had weekly lunches with 
clinton to keep each other abreast of current developments although he later 
said that it was he who insisted on having those weekly lunches in the first 
place debate with perot in one nine nine three gore debated ross perot on cnn s 
larry king live on the issue of free trade public opinion polls taken after the 
debate showed that a majority of americans agreed with his point of view and 
supported nafta some claim that this performance may have been responsible for 
the passing of nafta in the house of representatives where it passed two three 
four two zero zero initatives one of gore s major accomplishments as vice 
president was the national performance review which pointed out waste fraud and 
other abuse in the federal government and stressed the need for cutting the 
size of the bureaucracy and the number of regulations his book later helped 
guide president clinton when he down sized the federal government internet 
education as vice president gore instituted a federal program calling for all 
schools and libraries to be wired to the internet this was a culmination of 
work that he had started several years before while serving in the senate gore 
had introduced legislation which called for the creation of a new federal 
research center for educational computing to support an information systems 
highway environment during gore s tenure as vice president he was a strong 
proponent for environmental protection while a senator working on his book 
earth in the balance gore had traveled around the world on numerous fact 
finding missions on earth day one nine nine four gore launched the worldwide 
globe program an innovative hands on school based education and science 
activity that made extensive use of the internet to increase student awareness 
of their environment and contribute research data for scientists the opinions 
he developed on issues such as global warming the depletion of the ozone layer 
and the destruction of rain forests is said to have played a major role in 
policy making for the clinton administration in the late nineties gore strongly 
pushed for the passage of the kyoto treaty which called for reduction in green 
house emissions foreign policy because of president clinton s inexperience and 
gore s service in vietnam and in the senate clinton would often look to gore 
for advice in the area of foreign policy gore was one of the first to call for 
action to remove yugoslav president slobodan milo evi from power in one nine 
nine eight gore also supported operation desert fox a three day bombing 
campaign against iraq that attempted to degrade saddam hussein s ability to 
make and to use weapons of mass destruction vice president al gore works along 
side president clinton in trying to negotiate a middle east peace plan with 
palestinian leader yasser arafat other during the clinton gore administration 
americans enjoyed eight years of relative peace along with the longest economic 
expansion in history democrats attributed this prosperity to the policies of 
the clinton gore administration and especially to the passage of the omnibus 
budget reconciliation act of one nine nine three for which gore cast the tie 
breaking vote during his two zero zero zero campaign for the presidency gore 
attributed several positive economic results to his and clinton s policies more 
than two two million new jobs highest homeownership in american history lowest 
unemployment in three zero years paid off three six zero billion of the 
national debt lowest poverty rate in two zero years higher incomes at all 
levels converted the largest budget deficit up to that time in american history 
to the largest surplus lowest government spending in three decades lowest 
federal income tax burden in three five years and more families own stock than 
ever before however gore later placed a large share of the blame for his 
election loss on the economic downturn and nasdaq crash of march two zero zero 
zero in an interview with national public radio s bob edwards two zero zero 
zero presidential election al gore and running mate joe lieberman at the two 
zero zero zero democratic national convention after two terms as vice president 
gore ran for president in the democratic primaries gore faced an early 
challenge from bill bradley gore s nomination was never really in doubt and 
bradley withdrew from the race in early march two zero zero zero after failing 
to win any state primary or caucus in august two zero zero zero gore surprised 
many when he selected united states senator joe lieberman to be his vice 
presidential running mate lieberman who is a more conservative democrat than 
gore had publicly blasted president clinton for the monica lewinsky affair many 
pundits saw gore s choice of lieberman as another way of trying to distance 
himself from the scandal prone clinton white house lieberman was also the first 
jewish nominee on a major party s national ticket during the entire campaign 
gore was neck and neck in the polls with republican governor of texas george w 
bush on election day the results were so close that the outcome of the race 
took over a month to resolve highlighted by the premature declaration of a 
winner on election night and an extremely close result in the state of florida 
on election night news networks first called florida for gore then fox news 
decided to call it for bush and all of the other news stations followed their 
decision the race was ultimately decided by a razor thin margin of only five 
three seven popular votes in florida a state favored to have gone to bush as 
his brother served as governor the five three seven number was an astonishingly 
close margin out of some one zero five million votes cast nationwide florida s 
two five electoral votes were awarded to george w bush only after numerous 
court challenges al gore publicly conceded the election after the supreme court 
in bush v gore voted seven to two to declare the ongoing recount procedure 
unconstitutional because it feared that different standards would be used in 
different parts of the state and five to four to ban recounts using other 
procedures al gore makes a point during a presidential debate during the two 
zero zero zero election as george w bush looks on gore strongly disagreed with 
the court s decision but decided for the sake of our unity of the people and 
the strength of our democracy i offer my concession he had previously made a 
concession phone call to bush the night of the election but quickly retracted 
it after learning just how close the election was following the election a 
subsequent recount conducted by various u s news media organizations indicated 
that mr bush would have won using the partial recount method of four strongly 
democratic areas advocated by mr gore but that mr gore would have won given a 
full recount of the state the states that ultimately voted for gore over bush 
in the two zero zero zero elections were new york new jersey rhode island 
connecticut delaware maine vermont massachusetts washington d c pennsylvania 
michigan wisconsin new mexico california oregon washington illinois iowa 
maryland minnesota and hawaii giving gore two six seven electoral votes to bush 
s two seven one one of gore s electors cast a blank ballot to protest what she 
called dc s colonial status thus the candidate s final number of electoral 
votes was two six six the florida election has been closely scrutinized since 
the election critics have argued that the governor of florida jeb bush brother 
of george w bush and the secretary of state of florida katherine harris did 
play a part in ensuring that the state was in the red column of the republicans 
come election day several irregularities are thought to have favored bush 
others may have given gore an edge irregularities favoring bush included the 
notorious palm beach butterfly ballots which were alleged to have produced an 
unexpectedly large number of votes for reform party candidate pat buchanan and 
a purge of some five zero zero zero zero alleged felons from the florida voting 
rolls that included some voters who were again eligible to vote under florida 
law many bush supporters however believed that an unfair advantage was given to 
gore when all major news networks early on prematurely projected gore as the 
winner of florida s two five electoral votes at seven five two pm eastern time 
this happened before the polls closed in one zero florida counties in the 
heavily republican western panhandle which are in the central time zone and 
thus closed at seven pm central time eight pm eastern some have thought that 
this depressed the pro bush vote in that area during the numerous recounts 
which made the phrase hanging chads infamous in the american vocabulary there 
