anarchism originated as a term of abuse first used against early working class 
radicals including the diggers of the english revolution and the sans culottes 
of the french revolution whilst the term is still used in a pejorative way to 
describe any act that used violent means to destroy the organization of society 
it has also been taken up as a positive label by self defined anarchists the 
word anarchism is derived from the greek without archons ruler chief king 
anarchism as a political philosophy is the belief that rulers are unnecessary 
and should be abolished although there are differing interpretations of what 
this means anarchism also refers to related social movements that advocate the 
elimination of authoritarian institutions particularly the state the word 
anarchy as most anarchists use it does not imply chaos nihilism or anomie but 
rather a harmonious anti authoritarian society in place of what are regarded as 
authoritarian political structures and coercive economic institutions 
anarchists advocate social relations based upon voluntary association of 
autonomous individuals mutual aid and self governance while anarchism is most 
easily defined by what it is against anarchists also offer positive visions of 
what they believe to be a truly free society however ideas about how an 
anarchist society might work vary considerably especially with respect to 
economics there is also disagreement about how a free society might be brought 
about origins and predecessors kropotkin and others argue that before recorded 
history human society was organized on anarchist principles most 
anthropologists follow kropotkin and engels in believing that hunter gatherer 
bands were egalitarian and lacked division of labour accumulated wealth or 
decreed law and had equal access to resources william godwin anarchists 
including the the anarchy organisation and rothbard find anarchist attitudes in 
taoism from ancient china kropotkin found similar ideas in stoic zeno of citium 
according to kropotkin zeno repudiated the omnipotence of the state its 
intervention and regimentation and proclaimed the sovereignty of the moral law 
of the individual the anabaptists of one six th century europe are sometimes 
considered to be religious forerunners of modern anarchism bertrand russell in 
his history of western philosophy writes that the anabaptists repudiated all 
law since they held that the good man will be guided at every moment by the 
holy spirit from this premise they arrive at communism the diggers or true 
levellers were an early communistic movement during the time of the english 
civil war and are considered by some as forerunners of modern anarchism in the 
modern era the first to use the term to mean something other than chaos was 
louis armand baron de lahontan in his nouveaux voyages dans l am rique 
septentrionale one seven zero three where he described the indigenous american 
society which had no state laws prisons priests or private property as being in 
anarchy russell means a libertarian and leader in the american indian movement 
has repeatedly stated that he is an anarchist and so are all his ancestors in 
one seven nine three in the thick of the french revolution william godwin 
published an enquiry concerning political justice although godwin did not use 
the word anarchism many later anarchists have regarded this book as the first 
major anarchist text and godwin as the founder of philosophical anarchism but 
at this point no anarchist movement yet existed and the term anarchiste was 
known mainly as an insult hurled by the bourgeois girondins at more radical 
elements in the french revolution the first self labelled anarchist pierre 
joseph proudhon it is commonly held that it wasn t until pierre joseph proudhon 
published what is property in one eight four zero that the term anarchist was 
adopted as a self description it is for this reason that some claim proudhon as 
the founder of modern anarchist theory in what is property proudhon answers 
with the famous accusation property is theft in this work he opposed the 
institution of decreed property propri t where owners have complete rights to 
use and abuse their property as they wish such as exploiting workers for profit 
in its place proudhon supported what he called possession individuals can have 
limited rights to use resources capital and goods in accordance with principles 
of equality and justice proudhon s vision of anarchy which he called mutualism 
mutuellisme involved an exchange economy where individuals and groups could 
trade the products of their labor using labor notes which represented the 
amount of working time involved in production this would ensure that no one 
would profit from the labor of others workers could freely join together in co 
operative workshops an interest free bank would be set up to provide everyone 
with access to the means of production proudhon s ideas were influential within 
french working class movements and his followers were active in the revolution 
of one eight four eight in france proudhon s philosophy of property is complex 
it was developed in a number of works over his lifetime and there are differing 
interpretations of some of his ideas for more detailed discussion see here max 
stirner s egoism in his the ego and its own stirner argued that most commonly 
accepted social institutions including the notion of state property as a right 
natural rights in general and the very notion of society were mere illusions or 
ghosts in the mind saying of society that the individuals are its reality he 
advocated egoism and a form of amoralism in which individuals would unite in 
associations of egoists only when it was in their self interest to do so for 
him property simply comes about through might whoever knows how to take to 
defend the thing to him belongs property and what i have in my power that is my 
own so long as i assert myself as holder i am the proprietor of the thing 
stirner never called himself an anarchist he accepted only the label egoist 
nevertheless his ideas were influential on many individualistically inclined 
anarchists although interpretations of his thought are diverse american 
individualist anarchism benjamin tucker in one eight two five josiah warren had 
participated in a communitarian experiment headed by robert owen called new 
harmony which failed in a few years amidst much internal conflict warren blamed 
the community s failure on a lack of individual sovereignty and a lack of 
private property warren proceeded to organise experimenal anarchist communities 
which respected what he called the sovereignty of the individual at utopia and 
modern times in one eight three three warren wrote and published the peaceful 
revolutionist which some have noted to be the first anarchist periodical ever 
published benjamin tucker says that warren was the first man to expound and 
formulate the doctrine now known as anarchism liberty xiv december one nine 
zero zero one benjamin tucker became interested in anarchism through meeting 
josiah warren and william b greene he edited and published liberty from august 
one eight eight one to april one nine zero eight it is widely considered to be 
the finest individualist anarchist periodical ever issued in the english 
language tucker s conception of individualist anarchism incorporated the ideas 
of a variety of theorists greene s ideas on mutual banking warren s ideas on 
cost as the limit of price a heterodox variety of labour theory of value 
proudhon s market anarchism max stirner s egoism and herbert spencer s law of 
equal freedom tucker strongly supported the individual s right to own the 
product of his or her labour as private property and believed in a market 
economy for trading this property he argued that in a truly free market system 
without the state the abundance of competition would eliminate profits and 
ensure that all workers received the full value of their labor other one nine 
th century individualists included lysander spooner stephen pearl andrews and 
victor yarros the first international mikhail bakunin one eight one four one 
eight seven six in europe harsh reaction followed the revolutions of one eight 
four eight twenty years later in one eight six four the international 
workingmen s association sometimes called the first international united some 
diverse european revolutionary currents including anarchism due to its genuine 
links to active workers movements the international became signficiant from the 
start karl marx was a leading figure in the international he was elected to 
every succeeding general council of the association the first objections to 
marx came from the mutualists who opposed communism and statism shortly after 
mikhail bakunin and his followers joined in one eight six eight the first 
international became polarised into two camps with marx and bakunin as their 
respective figureheads the clearest difference between the camps was over 
strategy the anarchists around bakunin favoured in kropotkin s words direct 
economical struggle against capitalism without interfering in the political 
parliamentary agitation at that time marx and his followers focused on 
parliamentary activity bakunin characterised marx s ideas as authoritarian and 
predicted that if a marxist party gained to power its leaders would end up as 
bad as the ruling class they had fought against in one eight seven two the 
conflict climaxed with a final split between the two groups at the hague 
congress this is often cited as the origin of the conflict between anarchists 
and marxists from this moment the social democratic and libertarian currents of 
socialism had distinct organisations including rival internationals anarchist 
communism peter kropotkin proudhon and bakunin both opposed communism 
associating it with statism however in the one eight seven zero s many 
anarchists moved away from bakunin s economic thinking called collectivism and 
embraced communist concepts communists believed the means of production should 
be owned collectively and that goods be distributed by need not labor an early 
anarchist communist was joseph d jacque the first person to describe himself as 
libertarian unlike proudhon he argued that it is not the product of his or her 
labor that the worker has a right to but to the satisfaction of his or her 
needs whatever may be their nature he announced his ideas in his us published 
journal le libertaire one eight five eight one eight six one peter kropotkin 
often seen as the most important theorist outlined his economic ideas in the 
conquest of bread and fields factories and workshops he felt co operation is 
more beneficial than competition illustrated in nature in mutual aid a factor 
of evolution one eight nine seven subsequent anarchist communists include emma 
goldman and alexander berkman many in the anarcho syndicalist movements see 
below saw anarchist communism as their objective isaac puente s one nine three 
two comunismo libertario was adopted by the spanish cnt as its manifesto for a 
post revolutionary society some anarchists disliked merging communism with 
anarchism several individualist anarchists maintained that abolition of private 
property was not consistent with liberty for example benjamin tucker whilst 
professing respect for kropotkin and publishing his work described communist 
anarchism as pseudo anarchism propaganda of the deed johann most was an 
outspoken advocate of violence anarchists have often been portrayed as 
dangerous and violent due mainly to a number of high profile violent acts 
including riots assassinations insurrections and terrorism by some anarchists 
some revolutionaries of the late one nine th century encouraged acts of 
political violence such as bombings and the assassinations of heads of state to 
further anarchism such actions have sometimes been called propaganda by the 
deed one of the more outspoken advocates of this strategy was johann most who 
said the existing system will be quickest and most radically overthrown by the 
annihilation of its exponents therefore massacres of the enemies of the people 
must be set in motion most s preferred method of terrorism dynamite earned him 
the moniker dynamost however there is no consensus on the legitimacy or utility 
of violence in general mikhail bakunin and errico malatesta for example wrote 
of violence as a necessary and sometimes desirable force in revolutionary 
settings but at the same time they denounced acts of individual terrorism 
malatesta in on violence and bakunin when he refuted nechaev other anarchists 
sometimes identified as pacifist anarchists advocated complete nonviolence leo 
tolstoy whose philosophy is often viewed as a form of christian anarchism see 
below was a notable exponent of nonviolent resistance anarchism in the labour 
movement the red and black flag coming from the experience of anarchists in the 
labour movement is particularly associated with anarcho syndicalism anarcho 
syndicalism was an early two zero th century working class movement seeking to 
overthrow capitalism and the state to institute a worker controlled society the 
movement pursued industrial actions such as general strike as a primary 
strategy many anarcho syndicalists believed in anarchist communism though not 
all communists believed in syndicalism after the one eight seven one repression 
french anarchism reemerged influencing the bourses de travails of autonomous 
workers groups and trade unions from this movement the conf d ration g n rale 
du travail general confederation of work cgt was formed in one eight nine five 
as the first major anarcho syndicalist movement emile pataud and emile pouget s 
writing for the cgt saw libertarian communism developing from a general strike 
after one nine one four the cgt moved away from anarcho syndicalism due to the 
appeal of bolshevism french style syndicalism was a significant movement in 
europe prior to one nine two one and remained a significant movement in spain 
until the mid one nine four zero s the industrial workers of the world iww 
founded in one nine zero five in the us espoused unionism and sought a general 
strike to usher in a stateless society in one nine two three one zero zero zero 
zero zero members existed with the support of up to three zero zero zero zero 
zero though not explicitly anarchist they organized by rank and file democracy 
embodying a spirit of resistance that has inspired many anglophone syndicalists 
cnt propaganda from april two zero zero four reads don t let the politicians 
rule our lives you vote and they decide don t allow it unity action self 
management spanish anarchist trade union federations were formed in the one 
eight seven zero s one nine zero zero and one nine one zero the most successful 
was the confederaci n nacional del trabajo national confederation of labour cnt 
founded in one nine one zero prior to the one nine four zero s the cnt was the 
major force in spanish working class politics with a membership of one five 
eight million in one nine three four the cnt played a major role in the spanish 
civil war see also anarchism in spain syndicalists like ricardo flores mag n 
were key figures in the mexican revolution latin american anarchism was 
strongly influenced extending to the zapatista rebellion and the factory 
occupation movements in argentina in berlin in one nine two two the cnt was 
joined with the international workers association an anarcho syndicalist 
successor to the first international contemporary anarcho syndicalism continues 
as a minor force in many socities much smaller than in the one nine one zero s 
two zero s and three zero s the largest organised anarchist movement today is 
in spain in the form of the confederaci n general del trabajo and the cnt the 
cgt claims a paid up membership of six zero zero zero zero and received over a 
million votes in spanish syndical elections other active syndicalist movements 
include the us workers solidarity alliance and the uk solidarity federation the 
revolutionary industrial unionist industrial workers of the world also exists 
claiming two zero zero zero paid members contemporary critics of anarcho 
syndicalism and revolutionary industrial unionism claim that they are workerist 
and fail to deal with economic life outside work post leftist critics such as 
bob black claim anarcho syndicalism advocates oppressive social structures such 
as work and the workplace anarcho syndicalists in general uphold principles of 
workers solidarity direct action and self management the russian revolution the 
russian revolution of one nine one seven was a seismic event in the development 
of anarchism as a movement and as a philosophy anarchists participated 
alongside the bolsheviks in both february and october revolutions many 
anarchists initially supporting the bolshevik coup however the bolsheviks soon 
turned against the anarchists and other left wing opposition a conflict which 
culminated in the one nine one eight kronstadt rebellion anarchists in central 
russia were imprisoned or driven underground or joined the victorious 
bolsheviks in ukraine anarchists fought in the civil war against both whites 
and bolsheviks within the makhnovshchina peasant army led by nestor makhno 
expelled american anarchists emma goldman and alexander berkman before leaving 
russia were amongst those agitating in response to bolshevik policy and the 
suppression of the kronstadt uprising both wrote classic accounts of their 
experiences in russia aiming to expose the reality of bolshevik control for 
them bakunin s predictions about the consequences of marxist rule had proved 
all too true the victory of the bolsheviks in the october revolution and the 
resulting russian civil war did serious damage to anarchist movements 
internationally many workers and activists saw bolshevik success as setting an 
example communist parties grew at the expense of anarchism and other socialist 
movements in france and the us for example the major syndicalist movements of 
the cgt and iww began to realign themselves away from anarchism and towards the 
communist international in paris the dielo truda group of russian anarchist 
exiles which included nestor makhno concluded that anarchists needed to develop 
new forms of organisation in response to the structures of bolshevism their one 
nine two six manifesto known as the organisational platform of the libertarian 
communists was supported by some communist anarchists though opposed by many 
others the platform continues to inspire some contemporary anarchist groups who 
believe in an anarchist movement organised around its principles of theoretical 
unity tactical unity collective responsibility and federalism platformist 
groups today include the workers solidarity movement in ireland the uk s 
anarchist federation and the late north eastern federation of anarchist 
communists in the northeastern united states and bordering canada the fight 
against fascism spain one nine three six members of the cnt construct armoured 
cars to fight against the fascists in one of the collectivised factories in the 
one nine two zero s and one nine three zero s the familiar dynamics of 
anarchism s conflict with the state were transformed by the rise of fascism in 
europe in many cases european anarchists faced difficult choices should they 
join in popular fronts with reformist democrats and soviet led communists 
against a common fascist enemy luigi fabbri an exile from italian fascism was 
amongst those arguing that fascism was something different fascism is not just 
another form of government which like all others uses violence it is the most 
authoritarian and the most violent form of government imaginable it represents 
the utmost glorification of the theory and practice of the principle of 
authority in france where the fascists came close to insurrection in the 
february one nine three four riots anarchists divided over a united front 
policy in spain the cnt initially refused to join a popular front electoral 
alliance and abstention by cnt supporters led to a right wing election victory 
but in one nine three six the cnt changed its policy and anarchist votes helped 
bring the popular front back to power months later the ruling class responded 
with an attempted coup and the spanish civil war one nine three six three nine 
was underway in reponse to the army rebellion an anarchist inspired movement of 
peasants and workers supported by armed militias took control of the major city 
of barcelona and of large areas of rural spain where they collectivized the 
land but even before the eventual fascist victory in one nine three nine the 
anarchists were losing ground in a bitter struggle with the stalinists the cnt 
leadership often appeared confused and divided with some members 
controversially entering the government stalinist led troops suppressed the 
collectives and persecuted both dissident marxists and anarchists since the 
late one nine seven zero s anarchists have been involved in fighting the rise 
of neo fascist groups in germany and the united kingdom some anarchists worked 
within militant anti fascist groups alongside members of the marxist left they 
advocated directly combating fascists with physical force rather than relying 
on the state since the late one nine nine zero s a similar tendency has 
developed within us anarchism see also anti racist action us anti fascist 
action uk antifa religious anarchism leo tolstoy one eight two eight one nine 
one zero most anarchist culture tends to be secular if not outright anti 
religious however the combination of religious social conscience historical 
religiousity amongst oppressed social classes and the compatibility of some 
interpretations of religious traditions with anarchism has resulted in 
religious anarchism christian anarchists believe that there is no higher 
authority than god and oppose earthly authority such as government and 
established churches they believe that jesus teachings were clearly anarchistic 
but were corrupted when christianity was declared the official religion of rome 
christian anarchists who follow jesus directive to turn the other cheek are 
strict pacifists the most famous advocate of christian anarchism was leo 
tolstoy author of the kingdom of god is within you who called for a society 
based on compassion nonviolent principles and freedom christian anarchists tend 
to form experimental communities they also occasionally resist taxation many 
christian anarchists are vegetarian or vegan christian anarchy can be said to 
have roots as old as the religion s birth as the early church exhibits many 
anarchistic tendencies such as communal goods and wealth by aiming to obey 
utterly certain of the bible s teachings certain anabaptist groups of sixteenth 
century europe attempted to emulate the early church s social economic 
organisation and philosophy by regarding it as the only social structure 
capable of true obediance to jesus teachings and utterly rejected in theory all 
earthly hierarchies and authority and indeed non anabaptists in general and 
violence as ungodly such groups for example the hutterites typically went from 
initially anarchistic beginnings to as their movements stabalised more 
authoritarian social models chinese anarchism was most influential in the one 
nine two zero s strands of chinese anarchism included tai xu s buddhist 
anarchism which was influenced by tolstoy and the well field system neopaganism 
with its focus on the environment and equality along with its often 
decentralized nature has lead to a number of neopagan anarchists one of the 
most prominent is starhawk who writes extensively about both spirituality and 
activism anarchism and feminism emma goldman early french feminists such as 
jenny d h ricourt and juliette adam criticised the mysogyny in the anarchism of 
proudhon during the one eight five zero s anarcha feminism is a kind of radical 
feminism that espouses the belief that patriarchy is a fundamental problem in 
society while anarchist feminism has existed for more than a hundred years its 
explicit formulation as anarcha feminism dates back to the early seven zero s 
during the second wave feminist movement anarcha feminism views patriarchy as 
the first manifestation of hierarchy in human history thus the first form of 
oppression occurred in the dominance of male over female anarcha feminists then 
conclude that if feminists are against patriarchy they must also be against all 
forms of hierarchy and therefore must reject the authoritarian nature of the 
state and capitalism anarcho primitivists see the creation of gender roles and 
patriarchy a creation of the start of civilization and therefore consider 
primitivism to also be an anarchist school of thought that addresses feminist 
concerns eco feminism is often considered a feminist variant of green anarchist 
feminist thought anarcha feminism is most often associated with early two zero 
th century authors and theorists such as emma goldman and voltairine de cleyre 
although even early first wave feminist mary wollstonecraft held proto 
anarchist views and william godwin is often considered a feminist anarchist 
precursor it should be noted that goldman and de cleyre though they both 
opposed the state had opposing philosophies as de cleyre explains miss goldman 
is a communist i am an individualist she wishes to destroy the right of 
property i wish to assert it i make my war upon privilege and authority whereby 
the right of property the true right in that which is proper to the individual 
is annihilated she believes that co operation would entirely supplant 
competition i hold that competition in one form or another will always exist 
and that it is highly desirable it should in the spanish civil war an anarcha 
feminist group free women organized to defend both anarchist and feminist ideas 
in the modern day anarchist movement many anarchists male or female consider 
themselves feminists and anarcha feminist ideas are growing the publishing of 
quiet rumors an anarcha feminist reader has helped to spread various kinds of 
anti authoritarian and anarchist feminist ideas to the broader movement wendy 
mcelroy has popularized an individualist anarchism take on feminism in her 
books articles and individualist feminist website anarcho capitalism murray 
rothbard one nine two six one nine nine five anarcho capitalism is a 
predominantly united states based theoretical tradition that desires a 
stateless society with the economic system of free market capitalism unlike 
other branches of anarchism it does not oppose profit or capitalism 
consequently most anarchists do not recognise anarcho capitalism as a form of 
anarchism murray rothbard s synthesis of classical liberalism and austrian 
economics was germinal for the development of contemporary anarcho capitalist 
theory he defines anarcho capitalism in terms of the non aggression principle 
based on the concept of natural law competiting theorists use egoism 
utilitarianism used by david friedman or contractarianism used by jan narveson 
some minarchists such as ayn rand robert nozick and robert a heinlein have 
influenced anarcho capitalism some anarcho capitalists along with some right 
wing libertarian historians such as david hart and ralph raico considered 
similar philosophies existing prior to rothbard to be anarcho capitalist such 
as those of gustave de molinari and auberon herbert opponents of anarcho 
capitalists dispute these claims the place of anarcho capitalism within 
anarchism and indeed whether it is a form of anarchism at all is highly 
controversial for more on this debate see anarchism and anarcho capitalism 
anarchism and the environment since the late one nine seven zero s anarchists 
in anglophone and european countries have been taking action for the natural 
environment eco anarchists or green anarchists believe in deep ecology this is 
a worldview that embraces biodiversity and sustainability eco anarchists often 
use direct action against what they see as earth destroying institutions of 
particular importance is the earth first movement that takes action such as 
tree sitting another important component is ecofeminism which sees the 
domination of nature as a metaphor for the domination of women green anarchism 
also involves a critique of industrial capitalism and for some green anarchists 
civilization itself primitivism is a predominantly western philosophy that 
advocates a return to a pre industrial and usually pre agricultural society it 
develops a critique of industrial civilization in this critique technology and 
development have alienated people from the natural world this philosophy 
develops themes present in the political action of the luddites and the 
writings of jean jacques rousseau primitivism developed in the context of the 
reclaim the streets earth first and the earth liberation front movements john 
zerzan wrote that civilization not just the state would need to fall for 
anarchy to be achieved anarcho primitivists point to the anti authoritarian 
nature of many primitive or hunter gatherer societies throughout the world s 
history as examples of anarchist societies other branches and offshoots 
anarchism generates many eclectic and syncretic philosophies and movements 
since the western social formet in the one nine six zero s and one nine seven 
zero s a number new of movements and schools have appeared most of these 
stances are limited to even smaller numbers than the schools and movements 
listed above hakim bey post left anarchy post left anarchy also called egoist 
anarchism seeks to distance itself from the traditional left communists 
liberals social democrats etc and to escape the confines of ideology in general 
post leftists argue that anarchism has been weakened by its long attachment to 
contrary leftist movements and single issue causes anti war anti nuclear etc it 
calls for a synthesis of anarchist thought and a specifically anti 
authoritarian revolutionary movement outside of the leftist milieu it often 
focuses on the individual rather than speaking in terms of class or other broad 
generalizations and shuns organizational tendencies in favor of the complete 
absence of explicit hierarchy important groups and individuals associated with 
post left anarchy include crimethinc the magazine anarchy a journal of desire 
armed and its editor jason mcquinn bob black hakim bey and others for more 
information see infoshop org s anarchy after leftism section and the post left 
section on anarchism ws see also post left anarchy post structuralism the term 
postanarchism was originated by saul newman first receiving popular attention 
in his book from bakunin to lacan to refer to a theoretical move towards a 
synthesis of classical anarchist theory and poststructuralist thought 
subsequent to newman s use of the term however it has taken on a life of its 
own and a wide range of ideas including autonomism post left anarchy 
situationism post colonialism and zapatismo by its very nature post anarchism 
rejects the idea that it should be a coherent set of doctrines and beliefs as 
such it is difficult if not impossible to state with any degree of certainty 
who should or shouldn t be grouped under the rubric nonetheless key thinkers 
associated with post anarchism include saul newman todd may gilles deleuze and 
f lix guattari external reference postanarchism clearinghouse see also post 
anarchism insurrectionary anarchism insurrectionary anarchism is a form of 
revolutionary anarchism critical of formal anarchist labor unions and 
federations insurrectionary anarchists advocate informal organization including 
small affinity groups carrying out acts of resistance in various struggles and 
mass organizations called base structures which can include exploited 
individuals who are not anarchists proponents include wolfi landstreicher and 
alfredo m bonanno author of works including armed joy and the anarchist tension 
this tendency is represented in the us in magazines such as willful 
disobedience and killing king abacus see also insurrectionary anarchism small a 
anarchism small a anarchism is a term used in two different but not unconnected 
contexts dave neal posited the term in opposition to big a anarchism in the 
article anarchism ideology or methodology while big a anarchism referred to 
ideological anarchists small a anarchism was applied to their methodological 
counterparts those who viewed anarchism as a way of acting or a historical 
tendency against illegitimate authority as an anti ideological position small a 
anarchism shares some similarities with post left anarchy david graeber and 
andrej grubacic offer an alternative use of the term applying it to groups and 
movements organising according to or acting in a manner consistent with 
anarchist principles of decentralisation voluntary association mutual aid the 
network model and crucially the rejection of any idea that the end justifies 
the means let alone that the business of a revolutionary is to seize state 
power and then begin imposing one s vision at the point of a gun other issues 
conceptions of an anarchist society many political philosophers justify support 
of the state as a means of regulating violence so that the destruction caused 
by human conflict is minimized and fair relationships are established 
anarchists argue that pursuit of these ends does not justify the establishment 
of a state many argue that the state is incompatible with those goals and the 
cause of chaos violence and war anarchists argue that the state helps to create 
a monopoly on violence and uses violence to advance elite interests much effort 
has been dedicated to explaining how anarchist societies would handle 
criminality see also anarchism and society civil rights and cultural 
sovereignty black anarchism opposes the existence of a state capitalism and 
subjugation and domination of people of color and favors a non hierarchical 
organization of society theorists include ashanti alston lorenzo komboa ervin 
and sam mbah anarchist people of color was created as a forum for non caucasian 
anarchists to express their thoughts about racial issues within the anarchist 
movement particularly within the united states national anarchism is a 
political view which seeks to unite cultural or ethnic preservation with 
anarchist views its adherents propose that those preventing ethnic groups or 
races from living in separate autonomous groupings should be resisted anti 
racist action is not an anarchist group but many anarchists are involved it 
focuses on publicly confronting racist agitators the zapatista movement of 
chiapas mexico is a cultural sovereignty group with some anarchist proclivities 
neocolonialism and globalization nearly all anarchists oppose neocolonialism as 
an attempt to use economic coercion on a global scale carried out through state 
institutions such as the world bank world trade organization group of eight and 
the world economic forum globalization is an ambiguous term that has different 
meanings to different anarchist factions most anarchists use the term to mean 
neocolonialism and or cultural imperialism which they may see as related many 
are active in the anti globalization movement others particularly anarcho 
capitalists use globalization to mean the worldwide expansion of the division 
of labor and trade which they see as beneficial so long as governments do not 
intervene parallel structures many anarchists try to set up alternatives to 
state supported institutions and outposts such as food not bombs infoshops 
educational systems such as home schooling neighborhood mediation arbitration 
groups and so on the idea is to create the structures for a new anti 
authoritarian society in the shell of the old authoritarian one technology 
recent technological developments have made the anarchist cause both easier to 
advance and more conceivable to people many people use the internet to form on 
line communities intellectual property is undermined and a gift culture 
supported by sharing music files open source programming and the free software 
movement these cyber communities include the gnu linux indymedia and wiki some 
anarchists see information technology as the best weapon to defeat 
authoritarianism some even think the information age makes eventual anarchy 
inevitable see also crypto anarchism and cypherpunk pacifism some anarchists 
consider pacifism opposition to war to be inherent in their philosophy anarcho 
pacifists take it further and follow leo tolstoy s belief in non violence 
anarchists see war as an activity in which the state seeks to gain and 
consolidate power both domestically and in foreign lands and subscribe to 
randolph bourne s view that war is the health of the state a lot of anarchist 
activity has been anti war based parliamentarianism in general terms the 
anarchist ethos opposes voting in elections because voting amounts to condoning 
the state voluntaryism is an anarchist school of thought which emphasizes 
tending your own garden and neither ballots nor bullets the anarchist case 
against voting is explained in the ethics of voting by george h smith also see 
voting anarchists an oxymoron or what by joe peacott and writings by fred 
woodworth sectarianism most anarchist schools of thought are to some degree 
sectarian there is often a difference of opinion within each school about how 
to react to or interact with other schools some such as panarchists believe 
that it is possible for a variety of modes of social life to coexist and 
compete some anarchists view opposing schools as a social impossibility and 
resist interaction others see opportunities for coalition building or at least 
temporary alliances for specific purposes see anarchism without adjectives 
criticisms of anarchism main article criticisms of anarchism violence since 
anarchism has often been associated with violence and destruction some people 
have seen it as being too violent on the other hand hand frederick engels 
criticsed anarchists for not being violent enough a revolution is certainly the 
most authoritarian thing there is it is the act whereby one part of the 
population imposes its will upon the other part by means of rifles bayonets and 
cannon authoritarian means if such there be at all and if the victorious party 
does not want to have fought in vain it must maintain this rule by means of the 
terror which its arms inspire in the reactionists would the paris commune have 
lasted a single day if it had not made use of this authority of the armed 
people against the bourgeois utopianism anarchism is often criticised as 
unfeasible or plain utopian even by many who agree that it s a nice idea in 
principle for example carl landauer in his book european socialism criticizes 
anarchism as being unrealistically utopian and holds that government is a 
lesser evil than a society without repressive force he holds that the belief 
that ill intentions will cease if repressive force disappears is an absurdity 
however it must be noted that not all anarchists have such a utopian view of 
anarchism for example some such as benjamin tucker advocate privately funded 
institutions that defend individual liberty and property however other 
anarchists such as sir herbert read proudly accept the characterization utopian 
class character marxists have characterised anarchism as an expression of the 
class interests of the petite bourgeoisie or perhaps the lumpenproletariat see 
e g plekhanov for a marxist critique of one eight nine five anarchists have 
also been characterised as spoilt middle class dilettantes most recently in 
relation to anti capitalist protesters tacit authoritarianism in recent decades 
anarchism has been criticised by situationists post anarchists and others of 
preserving tacitly statist authoritarian or bureaucratic tendencies behind a 
dogmatic facade hypocrisy some critics point to the sexist and racist views of 
some prominent anarchists notably proudhon and bakunin as examples of hypocrisy 
inherent within anarchism while many anarchists however dismiss that the 
personal prejudices of one nine th century theorists influence the beliefs of 
present day anarchists others criticise modern anarchism for continuing to be 
eurocentric and reference the impact of anarchist thinkers like proudhon on 
fascism through groups like cercle proudhon anarcho capitalist bryan caplan 
argues that the treatment of fascists and suspected fascist sympathizers by 
spanish anarchists in the spanish civil war was a form of illegitimate coercion 
making the proffessed anarchists ultimately just a third faction of 
totalitarians alongside the communists and fascists he also criticizes the 
willingness of the cnt to join the statist republican government during the 
civil war and references stanley g payne s book on the franco regime which 
claims that the cnt entered negotiations with the fascist government six years 
after the war cultural phenomena noam chomsky one nine two eight the kind of 
anarchism that is most easily encountered in popular culture is represented by 
celebrities who publicly identify themselves as anarchists although some 
anarchists reject any focus on such famous living individuals as inherently 
litist the following figures are examples of prominent publicly self avowed 
anarchists the mit professor of linguistics noam chomsky the science fiction 
author ursula k le guin the social historian howard zinn entertainer and author 
hans alfredsson the avant garde artist nicol s rossell in denmark the freetown 
christiania was created in downtown copenhagen the housing and employment 
crisis in most of western europe led to the formation of communes and squatter 
movements like the one still thriving in barcelona in catalonia militant 
resistance to neo nazi groups in places like germany and the uprisings of 
autonomous marxism situationist and autonomist groups in france and italy also 
helped to give popularity to anti authoritarian non capitalist ideas in various 
musical styles anarchism rose in popularity most famous for the linking of 
anarchist ideas and music has been punk rock although in the modern age hip hop 
and folk music are also becoming important mediums for the spreading of the 
anarchist message in the uk this was associated with the punk rock movement the 
band crass is celebrated for its anarchist and pacifist ideas the dutch punk 
band the ex further exemplifies this expression for further details see anarcho 
punk see also there are many concepts relevant to the topic of anarchism this 
is a brief summary there is also a more extensive list of anarchist concepts 
individualist anarchism anarcho communism anarcho syndicalism anarcho 
capitalism mutualism christian anarchism anarcha feminism green anarchism 
nihilist anarchism anarcho nationalism black anarchism national anarchism post 
anarchism post left anarchism libertarian socialism anarchist symbolism list of 
anarchism links list of anarchists list of anarchist organizations major 
conflicts within anarchist thought past and present anarchist communities 
historical events paris commune one eight seven one haymarket riot one eight 
eight six the makhnovschina one nine one seven one nine two one kronstadt 
rebellion one nine two one spanish revolution one nine three six see anarchism 
in spain and spanish revolution may one nine six eight france one nine six 
eight wto meeting in seattle one nine nine nine books the following is a sample 
of books that have been referenced in this page a more complete list can be 
found at the list of anarchist books mikhail bakunin god and the state emma 
goldman anarchism other essays peter kropotkin mutual aid pierre joseph 
proudhon what is property rudolf rocker anarcho syndicalism murray rothbard the 
ethics of liberty max stirner the ego and its own leo tolstoy the kingdom of 
god is within you anarchism by region culture african anarchism anarchism in 
spain anarchism in the english tradition chinese anarchism references these 
notes have no corresponding reference in the article they might be re used 
against politics appleton boston anarchists yarros victor liberty vii january 
two one eight nine two noam chomsky on anarchism by noam chomsky external links 
the overwhelming diversity and number of links relating to anarchism is 
extensively covered on the links subpage anarchoblogs blogs by anarchists 
anarchy archives extensively archives information relating to famous anarchists 
this includes many of their books and other publications hundreds of anarchists 
are listed with short bios links dedicated pages at the daily bleed s anarchist 
encyclopedia infoshop org wikipedia page industrial workers of the world 
anarchism forms of government political ideology entry points political 
theories social philosophy autism is classified as a neurodevelopmental 
disorder that manifests itself in markedly abnormal social interaction 
communication ability patterns of interests and patterns of behavior although 
the specific etiology of autism is unknown many researchers suspect that autism 
results from genetically mediated vulnerabilities to environmental triggers and 
while there is disagreement about the magnitude nature and mechanisms for such 
environmental factors researchers have found at least seven major genes 
prevalent among individuals diagnosed as autistic some estimate that autism 
occurs in as many as one united states child in one six six however the 
national institute of mental health gives a more conservative estimate of one 
in one zero zero zero for families that already have one autistic child the 
odds of a second autistic child may be as high as one in twenty diagnosis is 
based on a list of psychiatric criteria and a series of standardized clinical 
tests may also be used autism may not be physiologically obvious a complete 
physical and neurological evaluation will typically be part of diagnosing 
autism some now speculate that autism is not a single condition but a group of 
several distinct conditions that manifest in similar ways by definition autism 
must manifest delays in social interaction language as used in social 
communication or symbolic or imaginative play with onset prior to age three 
years according to the diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 
the icd one zero also says that symptoms must manifest before the age of three 
years there have been large increases in the reported incidence of autism for 
reasons that are heavily debated by researchers in psychology and related 
fields within the scientific community some children with autism have improved 
their social and other skills to the point where they can fully participate in 
mainstream education and social events but there are lingering concerns that an 
absolute cure from autism is impossible with current technology however many 
autistic children and adults who are able to communicate at least in writing 
are opposed to attempts to cure their conditions and see such conditions as 
part of who they are history dr hans asperger described a form of autism in the 
one nine four zero s that later became known as asperger s syndrome the word 
autism was first used in the english language by swiss psychiatrist eugene 
bleuler in a one nine one two number of the american journal of insanity it 
comes from the greek word for self however the classification of autism did not 
occur until the middle of the twentieth century when in one nine four three 
psychiatrist dr leo kanner of the johns hopkins hospital in baltimore reported 
on one one child patients with striking behavioral similarities and introduced 
the label early infantile autism he suggested autism from the greek autos 
meaning self to describe the fact that the children seemed to lack interest in 
other people although kanner s first paper on the subject was published in a 
now defunct journal the nervous child almost every characteristic he originally 
described is still regarded as typical of the autistic spectrum of disorders at 
the same time an austrian scientist dr hans asperger described a different form 
of autism that became known as asperger s syndrome but the widespread 
recognition of asperger s work was delayed by world war ii in germany and by 
the fact that his seminal paper wasn t translated into english for almost five 
zero years the majority of his work wasn t widely read until one nine nine 
seven thus these two conditions were described and are today listed in the 
diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders dsm iv tr fourth edition 
text revision one as two of the five pervasive developmental disorders pdd more 
often referred to today as autism spectrum disorders asd all of these 
conditions are characterized by varying degrees of difference in communication 
skills social interactions and restricted repetitive and stereotyped patterns 
of behavior few clinicians today solely use the dsm iv criteria for determining 
a diagnosis of autism which are based on the absence or delay of certain 
developmental milestones many clinicians instead use an alternate means or a 
combination thereof to more accurately determine a diagnosis terminology when 
referring to someone diagnosed with autism the term autistic is often used 
however the term person with autism can be used instead this is referred to as 
person first terminology the autistic community generally prefers the term 
autistic for reasons that are fairly controversial this article uses the term 
autistic see talk page characteristics dr leo kanner introduced the label early 
infantile autism in one nine four three there is a great diversity in the 
skills and behaviors of individuals diagnosed as autistic and physicians will 
often arrive at different conclusions about the appropriate diagnosis much of 
this is due to the sensory system of an autistic which is quite different from 
the sensory system of other people since certain stimulations can affect an 
autistic differently than a non autistic and the degree to which the sensory 
system is affected varies wildly from one autistic person to another 
nevertheless professionals within pediatric care and development often look for 
early indicators of autism in order to initiate treatment as early as possible 
however some people do not believe in treatment for autism either because they 
do not believe autism is a disorder or because they believe treatment can do 
more harm than good social development typically developing infants are social 
beings early in life they do such things as gaze at people turn toward voices 
grasp a finger and even smile in contrast most autistic children prefer objects 
to faces and seem to have tremendous difficulty learning to engage in the give 
and take of everyday human interaction even in the first few months of life 
many seem indifferent to other people because they avoid eye contact and do not 
interact with them as often as non autistic children children with autism often 
appear to prefer being alone to the company of others and may passively accept 
such things as hugs and cuddling without reciprocating or resist attention 
altogether later they seldom seek comfort from others or respond to parents 
displays of anger or affection in a typical way research has suggested that 
although autistic children are attached to their parents their expression of 
this attachment is unusual and difficult to interpret parents who looked 
forward to the joys of cuddling teaching and playing with their child may feel 
crushed by this lack of expected attachment behavior children with autism 
appear to lack theory of mind the ability to see things from another person s 
perspective a behavior cited as exclusive to human beings above the age of five 
and possibly other higher primates such as adult gorillas chimpanzees and 
bonobos typical five year olds can develop insights into other people s 
different knowledge feelings and intentions interpretations based upon social 
cues e g gestures facial expressions an individual with autism seems to lack 
these interpretation skills an inability that leaves them unable to predict or 
understand other people s actions the social alienation of autistic and 
asperger s people is so intense from childhood that many of them have imaginary 
friends as companionship however having an imaginary friend is not necessarily 
a sign of autism and also occurs in non autistic children although not 
universal it is common for autistic people to not regulate their behavior this 
can take the form of crying or verbal outbursts that may seem out of proportion 
to the situation individuals with autism generally prefer consistent routines 
and environments they may react negatively to changes in them it is not 
uncommon for these individuals to exhibit aggression increased levels of self 
stimulatory behavior self injury or extensive withdrawal in overwhelming 
situations sensory system a key indicator to clinicians making a proper 
assessment for autism would include looking for symptoms much like those found 
in sensory integration dysfunction children will exhibit problems coping with 
the normal sensory input indicators of this disorder include oversensitivity or 
underreactivity to touch movement sights or sounds physical clumsiness or 
carelessness poor body awareness a tendency to be easily distracted impulsive 
physical or verbal behavior an activity level that is unusually high or low not 
unwinding or calming oneself difficulty learning new movements difficulty in 
making transitions from one situation to another social and or emotional 
problems delays in speech language or motor skills specific learning 
difficulties delays in academic achievement one common example is an individual 
with autism hearing a person with autism may have trouble hearing certain 
people while other people are louder than usual or the person with autism may 
be unable to filter out sounds in certain situations such as in a large crowd 
of people see cocktail party effect however this is perhaps the part of the 
autism that tends to vary the most from person to person so these examples may 
not apply to every autistic it should be noted that sensory difficulties 
although reportedly common in autistics are not part of the dsm iv diagnostic 
criteria for autistic disorder communication difficulties by age three typical 
children have passed predictable language learning milestones one of the 
earliest is babbling by the first birthday a typical toddler says words turns 
when he or she hears his or her name points when he or she wants a toy and when 
offered something distasteful makes it clear that the answer is no speech 
development in people with autism takes different paths some remain mute 
throughout their lives while being fully literate and able to communicate in 
other ways images sign language and typing are far more natural to them some 
infants who later show signs of autism coo and babble during the first few 
months of life but stop soon afterwards others may be delayed developing 
language as late as the teenage years still inability to speak does not mean 
that people with autism are unintelligent or unaware once given appropriate 
accommodations many will happily converse for hours and can often be found in 
online chat rooms discussion boards or websites and even using communication 
devices at autism community social events such as autreat those who do speak 
often use language in unusual ways retaining features of earlier stages of 
language development for long periods or throughout their lives some speak only 
single words while others repeat the same phrase over and over some repeat what 
they hear a condition called echolalia sing song repetitions in particular are 
a calming joyous activity that many autistic adults engage in many people with 
autism have a strong tonal sense and can often understand spoken language some 
children may exhibit only slight delays in language or even seem to have 
precocious language and unusually large vocabularies but have great difficulty 
in sustaining typical conversations the give and take of non autistic 
conversation is hard for them although they often carry on a monologue on a 
favorite subject giving no one else an opportunity to comment when given the 
chance to converse with other autistics they comfortably do so in parallel 
monologue taking turns expressing views and information just as neurotypicals 
people without autism have trouble understanding autistic body languages vocal 
tones or phraseology people with autism similarly have trouble with such things 
in people without autism in particular autistic language abilities tend to be 
highly literal people without autism often inappropriately attribute hidden 
meaning to what people with autism say or expect the person with autism to 
sense such unstated meaning in their own words the body language of people with 
autism can be difficult for other people to understand facial expressions 
movements and gestures may be easily understood by some other people with 
autism but do not match those used by other people also their tone of voice has 
a much more subtle inflection in reflecting their feelings and the auditory 
system of a person without autism often cannot sense the fluctuations what 
seems to non autistic people like a high pitched sing song or flat robot like 
voice is common in autistic children some autistic children with relatively 
good language skills speak like little adults rather than communicating at 
their current age level which is one of the things that can lead to problems 
since non autistic people are often unfamiliar with the autistic body language 
and since autistic natural language may not tend towards speech autistic people 
often struggle to let other people know what they need as anybody might do in 
such a situation they may scream in frustration or resort to grabbing what they 
want while waiting for non autistic people to learn to communicate with them 
people with autism do whatever they can to get through to them communication 
difficulties may contribute to autistic people becoming socially anxious or 
depressed repetitive behaviors although people with autism usually appear 
physically normal and have good muscle control unusual repetitive motions known 
as self stimulation or stimming may set them apart these behaviors might be 
extreme and highly apparent or more subtle some children and older individuals 
spend a lot of time repeatedly flapping their arms or wiggling their toes 
others suddenly freeze in position as children they might spend hours lining up 
their cars and trains in a certain way not using them for pretend play if 
someone accidentally moves one of these toys the child may be tremendously 
upset autistic children often need and demand absolute consistency in their 
environment a slight change in any routine in mealtimes dressing taking a bath 
or going to school at a certain time and by the same route can be extremely 
disturbing people with autism sometimes have a persistent intense preoccupation 
for example the child might be obsessed with learning all about vacuum cleaners 
train schedules or lighthouses often they show great interest in different 
languages numbers symbols or science topics repetitive behaviors can also 
extend into the spoken word as well perseveration of a single word or phrase 
even for a specific number of times can also become a part of the child s daily 
routine effects in education children with autism are affected with these 
symptoms every day these unusual characteristics set them apart from the 
everyday normal student because they have trouble understanding people s 
thoughts and feelings they have trouble understanding what their teacher may be 
telling them they do not understand that facial expressions and vocal 
variations hold meanings and may misinterpret what emotion their instructor is 
displaying this inability to fully decipher the world around them makes 
education stressful teachers need to be aware of a student s disorder so that 
they are able to help the student get the best out of the lessons being taught 
some students learn better with visual aids as they are better able to 
understand material presented this way because of this many teachers create 
visual schedules for their autistic students this allows the student to know 
what is going on throughout the day so they know what to prepare for and what 
activity they will be doing next some autistic children have trouble going from 
one activity to the next so this visual schedule can help to reduce stress 
research has shown that working in pairs may be beneficial to autistic children 
autistic students have problems in schools not only with language and 
communication but with socialization as well they feel self conscious about 
themselves and many feel that they will always be outcasts by allowing them to 
work with peers they can make friends which in turn can help them cope with the 
problems that arise by doing so they can become more integrated into the 
mainstream environment of the classroom a teacher s aide can also be useful to 
the student the aide is able to give more elaborate directions that the teacher 
may not have time to explain to the autistic child the aide can also facilitate 
the autistic child in such a way as to allow them to stay at a similar level to 
the rest of the class this allows a partially one on one lesson structure so 
that the child is still able to stay in a normal classroom but be given the 
extra help that they need there are many different techniques that teachers can 
use to assist their students a teacher needs to become familiar with the child 
s disorder to know what will work best with that particular child every child 
is going to be different and teachers have to be able to adjust with every one 
of them students with autism spectrum disorders typically have high levels of 
anxiety and stress particularly in social environments like school if a student 
exhibits aggressive or explosive behavior it is important for educational teams 
to recognize the impact of stress and anxiety preparing students for new 
situations by writing social stories can lower anxiety teaching social and 
emotional concepts using systematic teaching approaches such as the incredible 
five point scale or other cognitive behavioral strategies can increase a 
student s ability to control excessive behavioral reactions dsm definition 
autism is defined in section two nine nine zero zero of the diagnostic and 
statistical manual of mental disorders dsm iv as a total of six or more items 
from one two and three with at least two from one and one each from two and 
three qualitative impairment in social interaction as manifested by at least 
two of the following marked impairment in the use of multiple nonverbal 
behaviors such as eye to eye gaze facial expression body postures and gestures 
to regulate social interaction failure to develop peer relationships 
appropriate to developmental level a lack of spontaneous seeking to share 
enjoyment interests or achievements with other people e g by a lack of showing 
bringing or pointing out objects of interest lack of social or emotional 
reciprocity qualitative impairments in communication as manifested by at least 
one of the following delay in or total lack of the development of spoken 
language not accompanied by an attempt to compensate through alternative modes 
of communication such as gesture or mime in individuals with adequate speech 
marked impairment in the ability to initiate or sustain a conversation with 
others stereotyped and repetitive use of language or idiosyncratic language 
lack of varied spontaneous make believe play or social imitative play 
appropriate to developmental level restricted repetitive and stereotyped 
patterns of behavior interests and activities as manifested by at least one of 
the following encompassing preoccupation with one or more stereotyped and 
restricted patterns of interest that is abnormal either in intensity or focus 
apparently inflexible adherence to specific nonfunctional routines or rituals 
stereotyped and repetitive motor mannerisms e g hand or finger flapping or 
twisting or complex whole body movements persistent preoccupation with parts of 
objects delays or abnormal functioning in at least one of the following areas 
with onset prior to age three years one social interaction two language as used 
in social communication or three symbolic or imaginative play the disturbance 
is not better accounted for by rett s disorder or childhood disintegrative 
disorder the diagnostic and statistical manual s diagnostic criteria in general 
is controversial for being vague and subjective see the dsm cautionary 
statement the criteria for autism is much more controversial and some 
clinicians today may ignore it completely instead solely relying on other 
methods for determining the diagnosis types of autism autism presents in a wide 
degree from those who are nearly dysfunctional and apparently mentally 
handicapped to those whose symptoms are mild or remedied enough to appear 
unexceptional normal to the general public in terms of both classification and 
therapy autistic individuals are often divided into those with an iq eight zero 
are referred to as having high functioning autism hfa low and high functioning 
are more generally applied to how well an individual can accomplish activities 
of daily living rather than to iq the terms low and high functioning are 
controversial and not all autistics accept these labels further these two 
labels are not currently used or accepted in autism literature this discrepancy 
can lead to confusion among service providers who equate iq with functioning 
and may refuse to serve high iq autistic people who are severely compromised in 
their ability to perform daily living tasks or may fail to recognize the 
intellectual potential of many autistic people who are considered lfa for 
example some professionals refuse to recognize autistics who can speak or write 
as being autistic at all because they still think of autism as a communication 
disorder so severe that no speech or writing is possible as a consequence many 
high functioning autistic persons and autistic people with a relatively high iq 
are underdiagnosed thus making the claim that autism implies retardation self 
fulfilling the number of people diagnosed with lfa is not rising quite as 
sharply as hfa indicating that at least part of the explanation for the 
apparent rise is probably better diagnostics asperger s and kanner s syndrome 
asperger described his patients as little professors in the current diagnostic 
and statistical manual of mental disorders dsm iv tr the most significant 
difference between autistic disorder kanner s and asperger s syndrome is that a 
diagnosis of the former includes the observation of delays or abnormal 
functioning in at least one of the following areas with onset prior to age 
three years one social interaction two language as used in social communication 
or three symbolic or imaginative play while a diagnosis of asperger s syndrome 
observes no clinically significant delay in these areas the dsm makes no 
mention of level of intellectual functioning but the fact that asperger s 
autistics as a group tend to perform better than those with kanner s autism has 
produced a popular conception that asperger s syndrome is synonymous with 
higher functioning autism or that it is a lesser disorder than autism there is 
also a popular but not necessarily true conception that all autistic 
individuals with a high level of intellectual functioning have asperger s 
autism or that both types are merely geeks with a medical label attached also 
autism has evolved in the public understanding but the popular identification 
of autism with relatively severe cases as accurately depicted in rain man has 
encouraged relatives of family members diagnosed in the autistic spectrum to 
speak of their loved ones as having asperger s syndrome rather than autism 
autism as a spectrum disorder another view of these disorders is that they are 
on a continuum known as autistic spectrum disorders a related continuum is 
sensory integration dysfunction which is about how well we integrate the 
information we receive from our senses autism asperger s syndrome and sensory 
integration dysfunction are all closely related and overlap there are two main 
manifestations of classical autism regressive autism and early infantile autism 
early infantile autism is present at birth while regressive autism begins 
before the age of three and often around one eight months although this causes 
some controversy over when the neurological differences involved in autism 
truly begin some believe that it is only a matter of when an environmental 
toxin triggers the disorder this triggering could occur during gestation due to 
a toxin that enters the mother s body and is transfered to the fetus the 
triggering could also occur after birth during the crucial early nervous system 
development of the child due to a toxin directly entering the child s body 
increase in diagnoses of autism the number of reported cases of autism has 
increased dramatically over the past decade statistics in graph from the 
national center for health statistics there has been an explosion worldwide in 
reported cases of autism over the last ten years which is largely reminiscent 
of increases in the diagnosis of schizophrenia and multiple personality 
disorder in the twentieth century this has brought rise to a number of 
different theories as to the nature of the sudden increase epidemiologists 
argue that the rise in diagnoses in the united states is partly or entirely 
attributable to changes in diagnostic criteria reclassifications public 
awareness and the incentive to receive federally mandated services a widely 
cited study from the m i n d institute in california one seven october two zero 
zero two claimed that the increase in autism is real even after those 
complicating factors are accounted for see reference in this section below 
other researchers remain unconvinced see references below including dr chris 
johnson a professor of pediatrics at the university of texas health sciences 
center at san antonio and cochair of the american academy of pediatrics autism 
expert panel who says there is a chance we re seeing a true rise but right now 
i don t think anybody can answer that question for sure newsweek reference 
below the answer to this question has significant ramifications on the 
direction of research since a real increase would focus more attention and 
research funding on the search for environmental factors while little or no 
real increase would focus more attention to genetics on the other hand it is 
conceivable that certain environmental factors vaccination diet societal 
changes may have a particular impact on people with a specific genetic 
constitution there is little public research on the effects of in vitro 
fertilization on the number of incidences of autism one of the more popular 
theories is that there is a connection between geekdom and autism this is 
hinted for instance by a wired magazine article in two zero zero one entitled 
the geek syndrome which is a point argued by many in the autism rights movement 
this article many professionals assert is just one example of the media s 
application of mental disease labels to what is actually variant normal 
behavior they argue that shyness lack of athletic ability or social skills and 
intellectual interests even when they seem unusual to others are not in 
themselves signs of autism or asperger s syndrome others assert that it is 
actually the medical profession which is applying mental disease labels to 
children who in the past would have simply been accepted as a little different 
or even labeled gifted see clinomorphism for further discussion of this issue 
due to the recent publicity surrounding autism and autistic spectrum disorders 
an increasing number of adults are choosing to seek diagnoses of high 
functioning autism or asperger s syndrome in light of symptoms they currently 
experience or experienced during childhood since the cause of autism is thought 
to be at least partly genetic a proportion of these adults seek their own 
diagnosis specifically as follow up to their children s diagnoses because 
autism falls into the pervasive developmental disorder category strictly 
speaking symptoms must have been present in a given patient before age seven in 
order to make a differential diagnosis therapies sociology due to the 
complexity of autism there are many facets of sociology that need to be 
considered when discussing it such as the culture which has evolved from 
autistic persons connecting and communicating with one another in addition 
there are several subgroups forming within the autistic community sometimes in 
strong opposition to one another community and politics much like many other 
controversies in the world the autistic community itself has splintered off 
into several groups essentially these groups are those who seek a cure for 
autism dubbed pro cure those who do not desire a cure for autism and as such 
resist it dubbed anti cure and the many people caught in the middle of the two 
in recent history with scientists learning more about autism and possibly 
coming closer to a cure some members of the anti cure movement sent a letter to 
the united nations demanding to be treated as a minority group rather than a 
group with a mental disability or disease websites such as autistics org 
present the view of the anti cure group there are numerous resources available 
for autistics from many groups due to the fact that many autistics find it 
easier to communicate online than in person many of these resources are 
available online in addition sometimes successful autistic adults in a local 
community will help out children with autism much in the way a master would 
help out an apprentice for example two zero zero two was declared autism 
awareness year in the united kingdom this idea was initiated by ivan and 
charika corea parents of an autistic child charin autism awareness year was led 
by the british institute of brain injured children disabilities trust national 
autistic society autism london and eight zero zero organizations in the united 
kingdom it had the personal backing of british prime minister tony blair and 
parliamentarians of all parties in the palace of westminster culture with the 
recent increases in autism recognition and new approaches to educating and 
socializing autistics an autistic culture has begun to develop similar to deaf 
culture autistic culture is based in a belief that autism is a unique way of 
being and not a disorder to be cured there are some commonalities which are 
specific to autism in general as a culture not just autistic culture it is a 
common misperception that people with autism do not marry many do get married 
often they marry another person with autism although this is not always the 
case many times autistics are attracted to other autistics due to shared 
interests or obsessions but more often than not the attraction is due to simple 
compatibility with personality types the same as is true for non autistics 
autistics who communicate have explained that companionship is as important to 
autistics as it is to anyone else multigenerational autistic families have also 
recently become a bit more common the interests of autistic people and so 
called geeks or nerds can often overlap as autistic people can sometimes become 
preoccupied with certain subjects much like the variant normal behavior geeks 
experience however in practice many autistic people have difficulty with 
working in groups which impairs them even in the most technical of situations 
autistic adults temple grandin one of the more successful adults with autism 
photograph courtesy joshua nathaniel pritikin and william lawrence jarrold some 
autistic adults are able to work successfully in mainstream jobs usually those 
with high functioning autism or asperger s syndrome nevertheless communication 
and social problems often cause difficulties in many areas of the autistic s 
life other autistics are capable of employment in sheltered workshops under the 
supervision of managers trained in working with persons with disabilities a 
nurturing environment at home at school and later in job training and at work 
helps autistic people continue to learn and to develop throughout their lives 
some argue that the internet allows autistic individuals to communicate and 
form online communities in addition to being able to find occupations such as 
independent consulting which does generally not require much human interaction 
offline in the united states the public schools responsibility for providing 
services ends when the autistic person is in their two zero s depending on each 
state the family is then faced with the challenge of finding living 
arrangements and employment to match the particular needs of their adult child 
as well as the programs and facilities that can provide support services to 
achieve these goals autistic savants the autistic savant phenomenon is 
sometimes seen in autistic people the term is used to describe a person who is 
autistic and has extreme talent in a certain area of study although there is a 
common association between savants and autism an association created by the one 
nine eight eight film rain man most autistic people are not savants mental 
calculators and fast programming skills are the most common form the famous 
example is daniel tammet the subject of the documentary film the brain man kim 
peek one of the inspirations for dustin hoffman s character in the film rain 
man is not autistic bright splinters of the mind is a book that explores this 
issue further other pervasive developmental disorders autism and asperger s 
syndrome are just two of the five pervasive developmental disorders pdds the 
three other pervasive developmental disorders are rett syndrome childhood 
disintegrative disorder and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise 
specified some of these are related to autism while some of them are entirely 
separate conditions rett syndrome rett syndrome is relatively rare affecting 
almost exclusively females one out of one zero zero zero zero to one five zero 
zero zero after a period of normal development sometime between six and one 
eight months autism like symptoms begin to appear the little girl s mental and 
social development regresses she no longer responds to her parents and pulls 
away from any social contact if she has been talking she stops she cannot 
control her feet she wrings her hands some of these early symptoms may be 
confused for autism some of the problems associated with rett syndrome can be 
treated physical occupational and speech therapy can help with problems of 
coordination movement and speech scientists sponsored by the national institute 
of child health and human development have discovered that a mutation in the 
sequence of a single gene causes rett syndrome and can physically test for it 
with a eight zero accuracy rate rett syndrome in the past was sometimes 
classified as an autistic spectrum disorder however most scientists agree that 
rett syndrome is a separate developmental disorder and not part of the autistic 
spectrum childhood disintegrative disorder childhood disintegrative disorder 
cdd and sometimes abbreviated as chdd also is a condition appearing in three or 
four year old children who have developed normally until age two over several 
months the child will deteriorate in intellectual social and language 
functioning from previously normal behaviour this long period of normal 
development before regression helps differentiate cdd from rett syndrome and in 
fact it must be differentiated from autism in testing the cause for cdd is 
unknown thus it may be a spectrum disorder but current evidence suggests it has 
something to do with the central nervous system pervasive developmental 
disorder not otherwise specified pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise 
specified or pdd nos is referred to as a subthreshold condition because it is a 
classification which is given to someone who suffers from impairments in social 
interaction communication and or stereotyped behaviour but does not meet the 
criteria for one of the other four pervasive developmental disorders unlike the 
other four pervasive developmental disorders pdd nos has no specific guidelines 
for diagnosis so the person may have a lot of characteristics of an autistic 
person or few to none at all note that pervasive developmental disorder is not 
a diagnosis just a term to refer to the five mentioned conditions while pdd nos 
is an official diagnosis see also general autism therapies causes of autism 
conditions comorbid to autism spectrum disorders early childhood autism 
heritability of autism groups aspies for freedom national alliance for autism 
research controversy controversies about functioning labels in the autism 
spectrum controversies in autism ethical challenges to autism treatment lists 
list of autism related topics list of fictional characters on the autistic 
spectrum list of autistic people references abstract abstract manev r manev h 
aminoglycoside antibiotics and autism a speculative hypothesis bmc psychiatry 
two zero zero one one five epub two zero zero one one zero october strock 
margaret two zero zero four autism spectrum disorders pervasive developmental 
disorders nih publication no nih zero four five five one one national institute 
of mental health national institutes of health u s department of health and 
human services bethesda md four zero pp http www nimh nih gov publicat autism 
cfm footnotes external links general wrongplanet net the community and resource 
for autism autism spectrum disorder com autism spectrum disorder colour se 
seven en a website created to bring awareness of spectrum related disorders and 
forums for nt and asd interaction ericdigests org teaching students with autism 
glen dunlap lise fox eric digest october one nine nine nine autistic and proud 
describes new discoveries about autism autistics speaking for themselves weird 
not stupid a website created from the perspective of a person who has two 
siblings who are on the autism spectrum with the goal of giving information to 
anybody who is seeking it blogs autism pervasive developmental disorders by 
adelle jameson tilton about com autism news and more adventures in autism by a 
health professional who is the mother of an autistic boy autism symptoms 
getting the truth out by argues that there are common misconceptions about 
autism reality aba an autism diary by katherine lee mother of an autistic son 
organizations on the spectrum a web community for those on the autism spectrum 
with an emphasis on support and advocacy autismwebsite com autism research 
institute clearinghouse for information relating to autism particularly the 
biomedical treatment approach autism society org autism society of america 
autistics org clearinghouse for information related to autism from a non cure 
standpoint many articles by autistics center for the study of autism autism 
research institute founded by bernard rimland resources a way of life resources 
and information for parents autism treatment info treatment tips for children 
with autism pdd asperger s syndrome aba resources for recovery from autism 
information about and resource guide for behavioral intervention for autism 
autism resources com offering information and links regarding the developmental 
disabilities autism and asperger s syndrome autism talk parents educators 
discuss all views autismtoday com everything you need to know about autism 
autism today focus on autism selection of documentaries interviews etc autism 
org uk paris public autism resource information service directory of uk autism 
services autism spectrum quotient measure your autism spectrum quotient aspie 
quiz quiz that measures autistic traits autism childhood psychiatric disorders 
disability communication disorders mental illness diagnosis by dsm and iscdrhp 
neurological disorders albedo is the measure of reflectivity of a surface or 
body it is the ratio of electromagnetic radiation em radiation reflected to the 
amount incident upon it the fraction usually expressed as a percentage from 
zero to one zero zero is an important concept in climatology and astronomy this 
ratio depends on the frequency of the radiation considered unqualified it 
refers to an average across the spectrum of visible light it also depends on 
the angle of incidence of the radiation unqualified normal incidence fresh snow 
albedos are high up to nine zero the ocean surface has a low albedo the average 
albedo of earth is about three zero whereas the albedo of the moon is about 
seven in astronomy the albedo of satellites and asteroids can be used to infer 
surface composition most notably ice content enceladus a moon of saturn has the 
highest known albedo of any body in the solar system with nine nine of em 
radiation reflected human activities have changed the albedo via forest 
clearance and farming for example of various areas around the globe however 
quantification of this effect is difficult on the global scale it is not clear 
whether the changes have tended to increase or decrease global warming the 
classical example of albedo effect is the snow temperature feedback if a snow 
covered area warms and the snow melts the albedo decreases more sunlight is 
absorbed and the temperature tends to increase the converse is true if snow 
forms a cooling cycle happens the intensity of the albedo effect depends on the 
size of the change in albedo and the amount of insolation for this reason it 
can be potentially very large in the tropics some examples of albedo effects 
fairbanks alaska according to the national climatic data center s ghcn two data 
which is composed of three zero year smoothed climatic means for thousands of 
weather stations across the world the college weather station at fairbanks 
alaska is about three c five f warmer than the airport at fairbanks partly 
because of drainage patterns but also largely because of the lower albedo at 
the college resulting from a higher concentration of pine trees and therefore 
less open snowy ground to reflect the heat back into space neunke and kukla 
have shown that this difference is especially marked during the late winter 
months when solar radiation is greater the tropics although the albedo 
temperature effect is most famous in colder regions of earth because more snow 
falls there it is actually much stronger in tropical regions because in the 
tropics there is consistently more sunlight when brazilian ranchers cut down 
dark tropical rainforest trees to replace them with even darker soil in order 
to grow crops the average temperature of the area appears to increase by an 
average of about three c five f year round which is a significant amount small 
scale effects albedo works on a smaller scale too people who wear dark clothes 
in the summertime put themselves at a greater risk of heatstroke than those who 
wear white clothes pine forests the albedo of a pine forest at four five n in 
the winter in which the trees cover the land surface completely is only about 
nine among the lowest of any naturally occurring land environment this is 
partly due to the color of the pines and partly due to multiple scattering of 
sunlight within the trees which lowers the overall reflected light level due to 
light penetration the ocean s albedo is even lower at about three five though 
this depends strongly on the angle of the incident radiation dense swampland 
averages between nine and one four deciduous trees average about one three a 
grassy field usually comes in at about two zero a barren field will depend on 
the color of the soil and can be as low as five or as high as four zero with 
one five being about the average for farmland a desert or large beach usually 
averages around two five but varies depending on the color of the sand 
reference edward walker s study in the great plains in the winter around four 
five n urban areas urban areas in particular have very unnatural values for 
albedo because of the many human built structures which absorb light before the 
light can reach the surface in the northern part of the world cities are 
relatively dark and walker has shown that their average albedo is about seven 
with only a slight increase during the summer in most tropical countries cities 
average around one two this is similar to the values found in northern suburban 
transitional zones part of the reason for this is the different natural 
environment of cities in tropical regions e g there are more very dark trees 
around another reason is that portions of the tropics are very poor and city 
buildings must be built with different materials warmer regions may also choose 
lighter colored building materials so the structures will remain cooler trees 
because trees tend to have a low albedo removing forests would tend to increase 
albedo and thereby cool the planet cloud feedbacks further complicate the issue 
in seasonally snow covered zones winter albedos of treeless areas are one zero 
to five zero higher than nearby forested areas because snow does not cover the 
trees as readily studies by the hadley centre have investigated the relative 
generally warming effect of albedo change and cooling effect of carbon 
sequestration on planting forests they found that new forests in tropical and 
midlatitude areas tended to cool new forests in high latitudes e g siberia were 
neutral or perhaps warming snow snow albedos can be as high as nine zero this 
is for the ideal example however fresh deep snow over a featureless landscape 
over antarctica they average a little more than eight zero if a marginally snow 
covered area warms snow tends to melt lowering the albedo and hence leading to 
more snowmelt the ice albedo feedback this is the basis for predictions of 
enhanced warming in the polar and seasonally snow covered regions as a result 
of global warming clouds clouds are another source of albedo that play into the 
global warming equation different types of clouds have different albedo values 
theoretically ranging from a minimum of near zero to a maximum in the high 
seven zero s climate models have shown that if the whole earth were to be 
suddenly covered by white clouds the surface temperatures would drop to a value 
of about one five zero c two four zero f this model though it is far from 
perfect also predicts that to offset a five c nine f temperature change due to 
an increase in the magnitude of the greenhouse effect all we would need to do 
is increase the earth s overall albedo by about one two by adding more white 
clouds albedo and climate in some areas are already affected by artificial 
clouds such as those created by the contrails of heavy commercial airliner 
traffic a study following the september one one attacks after which all major 
airlines in the u s shut down for three days showed a local one c increase in 
the daily temperature range the difference of day and night temperatures see 
contrail aerosol effects aerosol very fine particles droplets in the atmosphere 
has two effects direct and indirect the direct albedo effect is generally to 
cool the planet the indirect effect the particles act as ccns and thereby 
change cloud properties is less certain black carbon another albedo related 
effect on the climate is from black carbon particles the size of this effect is 
difficult to quantify the ipcc say that their estimate of the global mean 
radiative forcing for bc aerosols from fossil fuels is zero two w m two from 
zero one w m two in the sar with a range zero one to zero four w m two 
electromagnetic radiation climatology climate forcing astrophysics view of abu 
dhabi satellite image of abu dhabi march two zero zero three emirates palace 
hotel front emirates palace hotel from the side abu dhabi arabic ab aby is the 
largest of the seven emirates that comprise the united arab emirates and was 
also the largest of the former trucial states abu dhabi is also a city of the 
same name within the emirate that is the capital of the country in north 
central uae the city lies on a t shaped island jutting into the persian gulf 
from the central western coast an estimated one zero zero zero zero zero zero 
lived there in two zero zero zero with about an eight zero expatriate 
population abu dhabi city is located at al ain is abu dhabi s second largest 
urban area with a population of three four eight zero zero zero two zero zero 
three census estimate and is located one five zero kilometres inland history 
parts of abu dhabi were settled as far back as the three rd millennium bc and 
its early history fits the nomadic herding and fishing pattern typical of the 
broader region modern abu dhabi traces its origins to the rise of an important 
tribal confederation the bani yas in the late one eight th century who also 
assumed control of dubai in the one nine th century the dubai and abu dhabi 
branches parted ways into the mid two zero th century the economy of abu dhabi 
continued to be sustained mainly by camel herding production of dates and 
vegetables at the inland oases of al ain and liwa and fishing and pearl diving 
off the coast of abu dhabi city which was occupied mainly during the summer 
months most dwellings in abu dhabi city were at this time constructed of palm 
fronds barasti with the better off families occupying mud huts the growth of 
the cultured pearl industry in the first half of the two zero th century 
created hardship for residents of abu dhabi as pearls represented the largest 
export and main source of cash earnings in one nine three nine sheikh shakhbut 
bin sultan al nahyan granted petroleum concessions and oil was first found in 
one nine five eight at first oil money had a marginal impact a few lowrise 
concete buildings were erected and the first paved road was completed in one 
nine six one but sheikh shakbut uncertain whether the new oil royalties would 
last took a cautious approach prefering to save the revenue rather than 
investing it in development his brother zayed bin sultan al nahayan saw that 
oil wealth had the potential to transform abu dhabi the ruling al nahayan 
family decided that sheikh zayed should replace his brother as ruler and carry 
out his vision of developing the country on august six one nine six six with 
the assistance of the british sheikh zayed became the new ruler see generally 
al fahim m from rags to riches a story of abu dhabi chapter six london centre 
of arab studies one nine nine five isbn one nine zero zero four zero four zero 
zero one with the announcement by britain in one nine six eight that it would 
withdraw from the gulf area by one nine seven one sheikh zayed became the main 
driving force behind the formation of the united arab emirates after the 
emirates gained independence in one nine seven one oil wealth continued to flow 
to the area and traditional mud brick huts were rapidly replaced with banks 
boutiques and modern highrises current ruler his highness sheikh khalifa bin 
zayed al nahayan is the hereditary emir and ruler of abu dhabi as well as the 
current president of the united arab emirates uae postal history shaikh zaid 
one nine six seven now part of the united arab emirates abu dhabi was formerly 
the largest of the seven sheikdoms which made up the trucial states on the so 
called pirate coast of eastern arabia between oman and qatar the trucial states 
as a whole had an area of some three two zero zero zero square miles of which 
abu dhabi alone had two six zero zero zero the capital was the town of abu 
dhabi which is on an offshore island and was first settled in one seven six one 
the name trucial states arose from treaties made with great britain in one 
eight two zero which ensured a condition of truce in the area and the 
suppression of piracy and slavery the treaty expired on three one december one 
nine six six the decision to form the uae was made on one eight july one nine 
seven one and the federation was founded on one august one nine seven two 
although the inaugural uae stamps were not issued until one january one nine 
seven three oil production began on das island after prospecting during one 
nine five six one nine six zero das island is part of abu dhabi but lies well 
offshore about one zero zero miles north of the mainland oil production on the 
mainland began in one nine six two as a major oil producer abu dhabi soon 
acquired massive financial wealth investment in long term construction projects 
and the establishment of a finance sector has led to the area becoming a centre 
of commerce which may well secure its lasting importance when the oil resources 
are exhausted in december one nine six zero postage stamps of british postal 
agencies in eastern arabia were supplied to the construction workers on das 
island but the postal service was administered via the agency office in bahrain 
the mail was also postmarked bahrain so there was no clear indication that a 
letter had come from das island on three zero march one nine six three a 
british agency was opened in abu dhabi and issued the agency stamps after the 
sheik objected to the use of the trucial states definitives mail from das 
island continued to be administered by bahrain but was now cancelled by an abu 
dhabi trucial states postmark the first abu dhabi stamps were a definitive 
series of three zero march one nine six four depicting shaikh shakhbut bin 
sultan al nahyan there were eleven values under the indian currency that was 
used of one zero zero naye paise one rupee the range of values was five np to 
one zero rupees despite the introduction of these definitives the british 
agency stamps remained valid in both abu dhabi and das island until the end of 
one nine six six when they were withdrawn a post office was opened on das 
island on six january one nine six six and this ended the bahrain service mail 
from das island was now handled within abu dhabi when the treaty with great 
britain expired at the end of one nine six six abu dhabi introduced a new 
currency of one zero zero zero fils one dinar and took over its own postal 
administration including the das island office the earlier issues were subject 
to surcharges in this currency and replacement definitives were released 
depicting the new ruler shaikh zaid issues continued until introduction of uae 
stamps in one nine seven three in all abu dhabi issued nine five stamps from 
one nine six four to one nine seven two the final set being three views of the 
dome of the rock in jerusalem source encyclopaedia of postal history climate 
sunny blue skies can be expected through out the year the months june through 
september are generally hot and humid with temperatures averaging above four 
zero c one one zero f the weather is usually pleasant from october to may 
january to february is cooler and may require the use of a light jacket the 
oasis city of al ain enjoys cooler temperatures even through summer due to 
sporadic rainfall transport abu dhabi international airport serves this city 
the local time is gmt four hours trivia the cartoon cat garfield would often 
put the kitten nermal in a box and ship him to abu dhabi a common phrase from 
garfield is abu dhabi is where all the cute kittens go the reason is that the 
author of garfield found out through over seas relations that the city of abu 
dhabi and the majority of uae has a large amount of cats that roam wild many 
live around the suburbs see also mina zayid the port of abu dhabi al ain 
marawah postal authorities saudi arabia transportation in the united arab 
emirates external links encyclopaedia of postal history abu dhabi the persian 
gulf abudhabi com abu dhabi chamber of commerce and industry abu dhabi national 
oil company spe history with oil details abu dhabi postal history adias abu 
dhabi islands archaeological survey expatriates forums in abu dhabi time out 
abu dhabi guide to life in abu dhabi career uae useful web site for the job 
seekers in abu dabi united arab emirates non government organisations ansar 
burney trust human rights and anti slavery organisation capitals in asia cities 
in the united arab emirates emirates coastal cities philately by country the 
letter a is the first letter in the latin alphabet its name in english is a 
plural aes a s or as history the letter a probably started as a pictogram of an 
ox head in egyptian hieroglyphs or the proto semitic alphabet by one six zero 
zero bc the phoenician alphabet s letter had a linear form that served as the 
basis for all later forms its name must have corresponded closely to the hebrew 
aleph the name is also similar to the arabic alif when the ancient greeks 
adopted the alphabet they had no use for the glottal stop that the letter had 
denoted in phoenician and other semitic languages so they used the sign for the 
vowel and changed its name to alpha in the earliest greek inscriptions dating 
to the eight th century bc the letter rests upon its side but in the greek 
alphabet of later times it generally resembles the modern capital letter 
although many local varieties can be distinguished by the shortening of one leg 
or by the angle at which the cross line is set the etruscans brought the greek 
alphabet to what was italy and left the letter unchanged the romans later 
adopted the etruscan alphabet to write latin and the resulting letter was 
preserved in the modern latin alphabet used to write many languages including 
english the letter has two minuscule lower case forms the form used in most 
current handwriting consists of a circle and vertical stroke most printed 
material uses a form consisting of a small loop with an arc over it both derive 
from the majuscule capital form in greek handwriting it was common to join the 
left leg and horizontal stroke into a single loop as demonstrated by the uncial 
version below many fonts then made the right leg vertical in some of these the 
serif that began the right leg stroke developed into an arc resulting in the 
printed form while in others it was dropped resulting in the modern handwritten 
form usage in english the letter a by itself usually denotes the lax open front 
unrounded vowel as in pad the open back unrounded vowel as in father or in 
concert with a later orthographic e the diphthong though the pronunciation 
varies with the dialect as in ace due to effects of the great vowel shift in 
most other languages that use the latin alphabet the letter a denotes either an 
open back unrounded vowel or an open central unrounded vowel in the 
international phonetic alphabet variants of the letter a denote various vowels 
in x sampa capital a denotes the open back unrounded vowel and lowercase a 
denotes the open front unrounded vowel a also is the english indefinite article 
extended to an before a vowel codes for computing in unicode the capital a is 
codepoint u zero zero four one and the lowercase a is u zero zero six one in 
hex a is the character used to represent decimal one zero or in binary zero one 
zero one zero the ascii code for capital a is six five and for lowercase a is 
nine seven or in binary zero one zero zero zero zero zero one and zero one one 
zero zero zero zero one correspondingly the ebcdic code for capital a is one 
nine three and for lowercase a is one two nine the numeric character references 
in html and xml are six five and nine seven for upper and lower case 
respectively meanings for a as a word see a an in american major league 
baseball the oakland athletics are often simply referred to as the a s in 
astronomy a stands for a january one through one five discovery in the 
provisional designation of a comet e g c one seven six zero a one the great 
comet of one seven six zero or asteroid e g a is often used to denote the semi 
major axis of an orbit in biochemistry a is the symbol for alanine and 
adenosine brassiere cup size a in calendars a is often an abbreviation for the 
months april and august in computing is the html element for an anchor tag in 
windows ctrl a and mac os command a selects all the text in the document or all 
the pixels of an image a sometimes represents the set of all alphabetic 
characters within string patterns a is the conventional address of the first 
floppy disk drive in cp m based operating systems such as dos a is a security 
division verified protection in the tcsec in education a grade of a typically 
represents the highest score that students can achieve this is sometimes 
coupled with a plus minus sign as in a or a or a number as in a one it is 
occasionally a grade one level below a pronounced a star in electronics a is a 
standard size of battery a refers to the anode or filament component of a 
vacuum tube in english the word a is an indefinite article see a an in 
esperanto a is the adjectival attributive ending a is commonly an abbreviation 
meaning english language in fiction the letter worn by hester prynne marking 
her as an adultress in the nathaniel hawthorne novel the scarlet letter was an 
a in film a is an italian film made in one nine six nine see a film in finance 
a is the u s ticker symbol for agilent technologies in games the letter a is 
used to mark each of the aces in a deck of playing cards in greek a is a prefix 
alpha privativum meaning not or devoid of used in many borrowed words in 
english german and romance languages in india a is movie rating given to those 
intended to be seen only by adults in international licence plate codes a 
stands for austria in international paper sizes a is a series of sizes with an 
aspect ratio of roughly seven zero width to height with a four being an example 
popular size in logic the letter a is used as a symbol for the universal 
affirmative proposition in the general form all x is y the letters i e and o 
are used respectively for the particular affirmative some x is y the universal 
negative no x is y and the particular negative some x is not y the use of these 
letters is generally derived from the vowels of the two latin verbs affirmo or 
aio i assert and nego i deny the use of the symbols dates from the one three th 
century though some authorities trace their origin to the greek logicians in 
symbolic logic the symbol an inverted letter a is the universal quantifier in 
mathematics a is often used as a digit meaning ten in hexadecimal and other 
positional numeral systems with a radix of one one or greater blackboard bold 
mathbb in unicode sometimes represents the algebraic numbers in the on line 
encyclopedia of integer sequences each sequence has an id consisting of the 
letter a and six base one zero digits in medicine a also a or a is one of the 
human blood types in music a is a pitch class or note see a musical note a or 
side a refers to the top or first side of a vinyl record a is a british rock 
band see a band a is an album by jethro tull see a album in nutrition a is a 
vitamin in photography most slr cameras use a to signify aperture priority mode 
where the user sets the aperture and the camera determines the shutter speed in 
poetry a is the major work of influential two zero th century author louis 
zukofsky in political theory a circumscribed a is an anarchist symbol as the 
first letter of a postal code in canada a stands for newfoundland and labrador 
on the serial numbers of united states dollars a identifies the federal reserve 
bank of boston in the si system of units a is the symbol for the ampere or amp 
the si base unit of electric current a atto is the si prefix meaning one zero 
one eight a is the symbol for the are a unit of surface area equal to one zero 
zero square metres as a timezone a is the military designation for coordinated 
universal time one also known as cet or central european time see also alpha 
cyrillic a ae aa latin letters vowels alabama cities and urban areas sprawl 
alabama is a state located in the southern united states history main article 
history of alabama the memory of the native american presence is particularly 
strong in alabama among native american people once living in present alabama 
were alabama alibamu cherokee chickasaw choctaw creek koasati and mobile trade 
with the northeast via the ohio river began during the burial mound period one 
zero zero zero bc a d seven zero zero and continued until european contact meso 
american influence is evident in the agrarian mississippian culture that 
followed the french established the first european settlement in the state with 
the establishment of mobile in one seven zero two southern alabama was french 
from one seven zero two one seven six three part of british west florida from 
one seven six three one seven eight zero and part of spanish west florida from 
one seven eight zero one eight one four northern and central alabama was part 
of british georgia from one seven six three one seven eight three and part of 
the american mississippi territory thereafter its statehood delayed by the lack 
of a coastline rectified when andrew jackson captured spanish mobile in one 
eight one four alabama became the two two nd state in one eight one nine the 
state of alabama seceded from the union on january one one one eight six one 
and became the alabama republic and on february one eight one eight six one 
became a confederate state while not many battles were fought in the state it 
contributed about one two zero zero zero zero soldiers to the civil war after 
the war a provisional government was set up in one eight six five and alabama 
was officially readmitted to the union on july one four one eight six eight the 
cradle of the confederacy during the civil war alabama was at stage center in 
the civil rights movement of the one nine five zero s and one nine six zero s 
law and government main article law and government of alabama local solid south 
a one party system in which the democratic party became essentially the only 
political party in every southern state for nearly one zero zero years local 
and state elections in alabama were decided in the democratic party primary 
with generally no republican challenger running from one eight seven six 
through one nine five six alabama supported only democratic presidential 
candidates by margins as high as seven three percentage points in one nine six 
zero alabama gave most of its electoral votes to harry f byrd as a protest in 
one nine six four the national republican party began to win more votes in the 
south by following a southern strategy which emphasized states rights and the 
increasing liberalism of the national democratic party the first such candidate 
was conservative barry goldwater who became the first republican candidate 
supported by alabama in one nine six eight alabama supported native son and 
american independent party candidate george wallace the last democratic 
candidate to win alabama s votes in a presidential election was southerner 
jimmy carter in one nine seven six today the republican party has become 
increasingly dominant in conservative alabama politics however in local 
politics democrats still control many offices including majorities in both 
houses of the legislature and registered democrats outnumber republicans in the 
state in two zero zero four george w bush won alabama s nine electoral votes by 
a margin of two five percentage points with six two five of the vote the only 
one one counties voting democratic were black belt counties where african 
americans are in the majority alabama is located in the bible belt and its 
educational policies reflect this according to the alan guttmacher institute 
alabama requires sex education classes to emphasize that homosexuality is not 
an acceptable lifestyle to the general public and that homosexual conduct is a 
criminal offense under the laws of the state while the mandate is not typically 
enforced in alabama classrooms it is unclear whether or not the official 
requirements have changed since the supreme court s ruling in lawrence v texas 
according to the united states census bureau in two zero zero zero alabama was 
home to four five six one same sex male couples and four one six seven same sex 
female couples u s presidential election two zero zero four in alabama 
geography main article geography of alabama alabama is the three zero th 
largest state in the united states with one three five seven seven five km two 
five two four two three mi two of total area three one nine of that is water 
making alabama two three rd in the amount of surface water also giving it the 
second largest inland waterway system in the united states about three fifths 
of the land area is a gentle plain with a general incline towards the 
mississippi river and the gulf of mexico the north alabama region is mostly 
mountainous with the tennessee river cutting a large valley creating numerous 
creeks streams rivers mountains and lakes the lowest point east of the 
mississippi river lies in dekalb county along a creek cutting tower ridges and 
creating buck s pocket state park another natural wonder is land bridge the 
longest natural bridge span east of the mississippi river alabama generally 
ranges in elevation from sea level at mobile bay to a little more than one 
eight zero zero feet or five five zero meters in the appalachian mountains in 
the northeast the highest point is mount cheaha economy greetings from alabama 
according to the bureau of economic analysis the two zero zero three total 
gross state product was one three two billion the per capita income for the 
state was two six five zero five in two zero zero three alabama s agricultural 
outputs include poultry and eggs cattle plant nursery items peanuts cotton 
grains such as corn and sorgum vegetables milk soybeans and peaches even though 
neighboring georgia is called the peach state alabama produces twice as many 
peaches annually its industrial outputs include iron and steel products 
including cast iron and steel pipe paper lumber and wood products mining mostly 
coal and plastic products cars and trucks and apparel also alabama produces 
aerospace and electronic products mostly in the huntsville area home of the 
nasa george c marshall space flight center and the us army missile command 
headquartered at redstone arsenal also the city of mobile is a busy seaport on 
the gulf of mexico and with inland waterway access to the midwest via the 
tennessee tombigbee waterway demographics alabama population density map race 
and ancestry the racial makeup of the state and comparison to the prior census 
the largest reported ancestry groups in alabama american one seven zero english 
seven eight irish seven seven german five seven and scotch irish two zero 
american includes those reported as native american or african american 
religion the major religions of alabama christian nine two protestant seven 
nine baptist four nine methodist one zero presbyterian three episcopalian two 
church of god two church of christ two pentecostal two lutheran two other 
protestant seven catholic one three other religions one non religious seven 
colleges and universities incomplete culture and interests famous alabamians 
alabama jubilee hot air balloon classic music of alabama alabama public 
television state wide public tv network list of television stations in alabama 
alabama shakespeare festival alabama sports festival spirit of america festival 
u s space the phrase the heart of dixie is required by state law to be included 
on standard state vehicle license plates but has recently been reduced to a 
very small size and eclipsed by the phrase stars fell on alabama alabama states 
of the united states one eight one nine establishments for other uses see 
achilles disambiguation the wrath of achilles by l on benouvillein greek 
mythology transliterated to akhilleus or achilleus in roman letters latinized 
from this ancient greek to achilles appearing in etruscan as achle was a hero 
ancient greek heros defender of the trojan war the greatest and the most 
central character of homer s iliad name the very first two lines of the iliad 
read transliterated m nin aeide thea p l iade akhil os oulomen n h muri 
akhaiois alge eth ken translated sing muse the wrath of achilles the son of 
peleus the destructive wrath that brought countless griefs upon the achaeans 
statue of achillesin these lines we see the name akhilleus peleides which is a 
praenomen and a patronymic the latter being formed from peleus with the suffix 
ides producing achilles the son of peleus the system is similar to the names 
used by scandinavians before modern times such as leif erikson achilles name 
can be analyzed as a combination of akhos grief and laos a people tribe nation 
etc in other words achilles is an embodiment of the grief of the people grief 
being a theme raised numerous times in the iliad frequently by achilles 
achilles role as the hero of grief forms an ironic juxtaposition with the 
conventional view of achilles as the hero of kleos glory usually glory in war 
laos has been construed by gregory nagy following leonard palmer to mean a 
corps of soldiers with this derivation the name would have a double meaning in 
the poem when the hero is functioning rightly his men bring grief to the enemy 
but when wrongly his men get the grief the poem is in part about the 
misdirection of anger on the part of leadership birth achilles was the son of 
the mortal peleus king of the myrmidons in phthia southeast thessaly and the 
sea nymph thetis zeus and poseidon had been rivals for the hand of thetis until 
prometheus the fire bringer prophesized that thetis would bear a son greater 
than his father for this reason the two gods withdrew their pursuit and had her 
wed to peleus when achilles was born according to the most common version of 
the myth thetis tried to make him immortal by dipping him in the river styx but 
she forgot to wet the heel she held him by leaving him vulnerable at that spot 
see achilles tendon in an earlier and less popular version of the story thetis 
anointed the boy in ambrosia and put him on top of a fire to burn away the 
mortal parts of his body she was interrupted by peleus and abandoned both 
father and son in a rage homer does not make reference to this invulnerability 
in the iliad to the contrary he mentions achilles being wounded although not 
seriously peleus gave him together with his young friend or lover patroclus to 
chiron the centaur on mt pelion to be raised achilles in the trojan war 
telephus when the greeks left for the trojan war they accidentally stopped in 
mysia ruled by king telephus in the resulting battle achilles gave telephus a 
wound that would not heal telephus consulted an oracle who stated that he that 
wounded shall heal according to other reports in euripides lost play about 
telephus he went to aulis pretending to be a beggar and asked achilles to heal 
his wound achilles refused claiming to have no medical knowledge alternatively 
telephus held orestes for ransom the ransom being achilles aid in healing the 
wound odysseus reasoned that the spear had inflicted the wound therefore the 
spear must be able to heal it pieces of the spear were scraped off onto the 
wound and telephus was healed this is an example of sympathetic magic during 
the trojan war the rage of achilles by giovanni battista tiepolo in homer s 
iliad achilles is the only mortal to experience consuming rage menon his anger 
is at some times wavering at other times absolute the humanization of achilles 
by the events of the war is an important theme of the iliad achilles charioteer 
s name was automedon troilus according to dares phrygius account of the 
destruction of troy while troilus the youngest son of priam and hecuba whom 
some say was fathered by apollo was watering his horses at the lion fountain 
outside the walls of troy achilles saw him and fell in love with his beauty 
whose loveliness of form was described by ibycus as being like gold thrice 
refined the youth rejected his advances and took refuge inside the temple of 
apollo achilles pursued him into the sanctuary and decapitated him on the god s 
own altar tzetzes scholiast on lycophron at the time troilus was said to be a 
year short of his twentieth birthday and the legend goes that if troilus had 
lived to be twenty troy would have been invincible first vatican mythographer 
agamemnon and the death of patroclus patroclus and achilles achilles bandages 
the arm of his friend patroclus the latter turns his head aside to avoid the 
sight of blood and of achilles noticing his pain grimaces the scene has been 
interpreted as an act of welfare and comradeship or as a scene with sexual 
overtones ancient greek culture often held the two to be lovers achilles took 
two three towns outside troy including lyrnessos where he captured briseis to 
keep as a concubine meanwhile agamemnon took a woman named chryseis and taunted 
her father chryses a priest of apollo when he attempted to buy her back apollo 
sent a plague through the greek armies and agamemnon was forced to give 
chryseis back to her father however he took briseis away from achilles as 
compensation for his loss this action sparked the central plot of the iliad 
achilles becomes enraged and refuses to fight for the greeks any further the 
war goes badly through the influence of zeus and the greeks offer handsome 
reparations to their greatest warrior after the greeks are pushed back to the 
ships which are just starting to be set on fire by the trojan hero hector 
achilles is visited by odysseus ajax and phoenix who attempt to persuade him to 
return to battle achilles still refuses to fight but agrees to allow patroclus 
to fight in his place wearing his armor the next day patroclus is killed and 
stripped of the armor by hector who mistakes him for achilles achilles is 
overwhelmed with grief for his beloved friend and the rage he once harbored 
toward agamemnon begins shifting to hector thetis his mother rises from the sea 
floor and sympathizes with his grief she obtains magnificent new armor for him 
from hephaestus the goddess athena provides him with the aegis of zeus when he 
goes to the battlefield the entire trojan army flees behind the walls of troy 
achilles wrath is terrible and he slays many trojan warriors and allies 
including priam s son lycaon whom achilles had previously captured and sold 
into slavery but who had been returned to troy eventually hector comes out of 
the walls to defend the honour of troy he asked achilles to agree that the body 
of the loser would be returned for proper burial by the winner achilles 
rejected this arrangement saying though twenty ransoms and thy weight in gold 
were offered i would refuse it all stories tell that hector ran about troy 
seven times and achilles followed him however seeing that achilles would not be 
outrun hector stood his ground and fought other versions of the tale say that 
achilles chased after hector two times and one time he was delivered by the 
gods however on their second encounter achilles trapped hector and challenged 
him after a legendary fight achilles kills hector influenced by his anger he 
drags the body of hector behind his chariot round the walls of troy three times 
and refuses to allow it to receive funeral rites much to the dismay of achilles 
the body of hector miraculously heals and will not decay as normally expected 
aphrodite the goddess of love who sided with troy throughout the whole conflict 
put a protective barrier over hector which kept him looking like he did before 
he was viciously killed by achilles when priam the king of troy and hector s 
father comes secretly into the greek camp to plead for the body achilles 
finally relents in one of the most moving scenes of the iliad he receives priam 
graciously and allows him to take the body away the scene is intensely moving 
because priam the king of one of the greatest cities in the known world kneels 
down old and frail as he is and kisses the hands of the man who killed his son 
the greatness of achilles lies in not just being the greatest greek fighter 
ever but in knowing the choice provided to him by destiny his mother thetis had 
prophesied to him that if he pulled out of the trojan war he would enjoy a long 
and a happy life if achilles fought however he would die before the walls of 
troy but assure an everlasting glory surpassing that of all other heroes he had 
made the choice and coming face to face with it showed his greatness xanthos 
during the trojan war xanthos one of achilles horses was rebuked by achilles 
for allowing patroclus to be killed xanthos responded by saying hera 
temporarily gave him voice to do so that a god and a mortal had killed 
patroclus and a god and a mortal would soon kill achilles too memnon cycnus 
penthesilea and the death of achilles thetis rising from the sea to comfort 
achilles book one eight by thomas banks english one seven seven eight victoria 
and albert museum shortly after the death of hector achilles defeated memnon of 
ethiopia cycnus of colonae and the amazonian warrior penthesilia with whom 
achilles also had an affair in some versions as predicted by hector with his 
dying breath achilles was thereafter killed by paris either by an arrow to the 
heel which may have subsequently become fatally infected and is said to have 
been guided by apollo or in an older version by a knife to the back while 
visiting polyxena a princess of troy both versions conspicuously deny the 
killer any sort of valor and achilles remains undefeated on the battlefield 
paris was later killed by philoctetes using the enormous bow of heracles his 
bones are mingled with those of patroclus and funeral games are held like ajax 
he is represented although not by homer as living after his death in the island 
of leuke at the mouth of the danube the fate of achilles armor achilles armor 
was the object of a feud between odysseus and ajax the greater achilles older 
cousin they competed for it and odysseus won ajax went mad with grief and vowed 
to kill his comrades he started killing cattle thinking they were greek 
soldiers and then himself other stories about achilles some post homeric 
sources claim that in order to keep achilles safe from the war thetis or in 
some versions peleus hid the young man at the court of lycomedes king of skyros 
there achilles was disguised as a girl and lived among lycomedes daughters 
under the name pyrrha the red haired girl with lycomedes daughter deidamia 
achilles fathered a son neoptolemus also called pyrrhus after his father s 
alias according to this story odysseus learned from the prophet calchas that 
the achaeans would be unable to capture troy without achilles aid he went to 
skyros in the guise of a peddler selling women s clothes and jewelry but placed 
a shield and spear among his goods when achilles instantly took up the spear 
odysseus saw through his disguise and convinced him to join the trojan campaign 
in another version of the story odysseus arranged for a trumpet alarm to be 
sounded while he was with lycomedes women while the women fled in panic 
achilles prepared to defend the court thus giving his identity away the story 
about achilles in drag is not found in homer in homer s odyssey there is a 
passage in which odysseus sails to the underworld and converses with the shades 
one of these is achilles who when greeted as blessed in life blessed in death 
responds that he would rather be a slave than be dead this has been interpreted 
as a rejection of his warrior life but also as indignity to his martyrdom being 
slighted the kings of epirus claimed to be descended from achilles through his 
son alexander the great son of the epiran princess olympias could therefore 
also claim this descent and in many ways strove to be like his great ancestor 
he is said to have visited his tomb while passing troy achilles was worshipped 
as a sea god in many of the greek colonies on the black sea the homosexual 
relationship between achilles and patroclus is something much explored in post 
homeric literature by the fifth and fourth centuries the deep and arguably 
ambiguous friendship portrayed in homer blossomed into an unequivocal love 
affair in the works of aeschylus plato and aeschines and seems to have inspired 
the enigmatic verses in lycophron s third century alexandra that claim achilles 
slayed troilus in a matter of unrequited love achilles fought and killed the 
amazon helene some also said he married medea and that after both their deaths 
they were united in the elysian fields of hades as hera promised thetis in 
apollonius argonautica achilles in lost plays in the early one nine nine zero s 
a lost play by aeschylus was discovered in the wrappings of a mummy in egypt 
the play achilles was part of a trilogy about the trojan war it was known to 
exist due to mentions in ancient sources but had been lost for over two zero 
zero zero years another lost play by aeschylus the myrmidons focussed on the 
relationship between achilles and patroclus only a few lines survive today 
there is another lost play with achilles as the main character the lovers of 
achilles by sophocles spoken word myths audio achilles in music achilles has 
frequently been mentioned in music achilles agony by manowar from the album the 
triumph of steel one nine nine two atlantic records achilles last stand by led 
zeppelin from the album presence one nine seven six atlantic records achilles 
revenge is a song by warlord achilles heel is an album by the indie rock band 
pedro the lion achilles and his heel are referenced in the song special k by 
the rock band placebo achilles is referred to in bob dylan s song temporary 
like achilles achilles heel is a song by the uk band toploader achilles is a 
song by the colorado based power metal band jag panzer from the album casting 
the stones achilles is referenced in the indigo girls song ghost achilles in 
film the role of achilles has been played by stanley baker in helen of troy one 
nine five six arturo dominici in la guerra di troia one nine six two derek 
jacobi voice in achilles channel four television one nine nine five steve 
davislim in la belle h l ne tv one nine nine six joe montana in helen of troy 
tv two zero zero three brad pitt in troy two zero zero four namesakes the royal 
new zealand navy gave the name hmnzs achilles to an a class destroyer which 
served in world war ii references homer iliad homer odyssey xi four six seven 
five four zero apollodorus bibliotheca iii xiii five eight apollodorus epitome 
iii one four v seven ovid metamorphoses xi two one seven two six five xii five 
eight zero xiii three nine eight ovid heroides iii apollonius rhodius 
argonautica iv seven eight three eight seven nine dante the divine comedy 
inferno v bibliography ileana chirassi colombo heros achilleus theos apollon in 
il mito greco d bruno gentili anthony edwards achilles in the underworld iliad 
odyssey and thiopis greek roman and byzantine studies two six one nine eight 
five pp two one five two two seven achilles in the odyssey ideologies of 
heroism in the homeric epic beitrage zur klassischen philologie one seven one 
meisenheim one nine eight five kleos aphthiton and oral theory classical 
quarterly three eight one nine eight eight pp two five three zero h l ne 
monsacr les larmes d achille le h ros la femme et la souffrance dans la po sie 
d hom re paris albin michel one nine eight four gregory nagy the best of the 
acheans concepts of the hero in archaic greek poetry johns hopkins university 
one nine nine nine rev edition the name of achilles questions of etymology and 
folk etymology illinois classical studies one nine one nine nine four dale s 
sinos the entry of achilles into greek epic ph d thesis johns hopkins 
university johansson warren achilles encyclopedia of homosexuality dynes wayne 
r ed garland publishing one nine nine zero p eight external links the story of 
achilles and patroclus trojan war resources people who fought in the trojan war 
anti heroes pederastic heroes and deities for other uses of the name abraham 
lincoln see abraham lincoln disambiguation abraham lincoln february one two one 
eight zero nine april one five one eight six five sometimes called abe lincoln 
and nicknamed honest abe the rail splitter and the great emancipator was the 
one six th president of the united states one eight six one to one eight six 
five and the first president from the republican party lincoln opposed the 
expansion of slavery and oversaw the union war effort during the american civil 
war he selected the generals and approved their strategy selected senior 
civilian officials supervised diplomacy patronage and party affairs rallied 
public opinion through messages and speeches such as the gettysburg address and 
took personal charge of plans for the abolition of slavery and the 
reconstruction of the union he was assassinated as the war ended by john wilkes 
booth role in history president lincoln was opposed to what he saw as the slave 
power and staunchly opposed its efforts to expand slavery into federal 
territories his victory in the one eight six zero presidential election further 
polarized an already divided nation before his inauguration in march of one 
eight six one seven southern states seceded from the united states formed the 
confederate states of america and took control of u s forts and other 
properties within their boundaries these events soon led to the american civil 
war lincoln is often praised for his work as a wartime leader who proved adept 
at balancing competing considerations and at getting rival groups to work 
together toward a common goal lincoln had to negotiate between radical and 
moderate republican leaders who were often far apart on the issues while 
attempting to win support from war democrats and loyalists in the seceding 
states he personally directed the war effort in close cooperation one eight six 
four six five with general ulysses s grant which ultimately led the union 
forces to victory over the confederacy his leadership qualities were evident in 
his diplomatic handling of the border slave states at the beginning of the 
fighting in his defeat of a congressional attempt to reorganize his cabinet in 
one eight six two in his many speeches and writings which helped mobilize and 
inspire the north and in his defusing of the peace issue in the one eight six 
four presidential campaign copperheads vehemently criticized him for violating 
the constitution overstepping the bounds of executive power refusing to 
compromise on slavery declaring martial law suspending habeas corpus ordering 
the arrest of thousands of public officials and a number of newspaper 
publishers and killing hundreds of thousands of young men radical republicans 
criticized him for going too slow on abolition of slavery and not being 
ruthless enough toward the conquered south lincoln is most famous for his roles 
in preserving the union and ending slavery in the united states with the 
emancipation proclamation and the thirteenth amendment to the united states 
constitution however some abolitionists criticized him for only freeing the 
slaves under the confederacy in one eight six three and waiting until one eight 
six five to free slaves held in the union historians have argued that lincoln 
had a lasting influence on u s political and social institutions importantly 
setting a precedent for greater centralization of powers in the federal 
government and the weakening of the powers of the individual state governments 
lincoln spent most of his attention on military matters and politics but with 
his strong support his administration established the current system of 
national banks with the national bank act he increased the tariff to raise 
revenue and encourage factories imposed the first income tax issued hundreds of 
millions of dollars of bonds and greenbacks encouraged immigration from europe 
built the transcontinental railroad set up the department of agriculture 
encouraged farm ownership with the homestead act of one eight six two and set 
up the modern system of state universities with the morrill land grant colleges 
act during the war his treasury department effectively controlled all cotton 
trade in the occupied south the most dramatic incursion of federal controls on 
the economy during his administration west virginia and nevada were admitted as 
states lincoln is usually ranked as one of the greatest presidents because of 
his roles in destroying slavery redefining national values and saving the union 
his assassination made him a martyr to millions of americans however others 
considered him an unconstitutional tyrant for declaring martial law suspending 
civil liberties habeas corpus and the first amendment and ordering the arrest 
of thousands of public officials and newspaper publishers early life abraham 
lincoln was born on february one two one eight zero nine in a one room log 
cabin on the three four eight acre one four km sinking spring farm in the 
southeast part of hardin county kentucky then considered the frontier now part 
of larue co in nolin creek three miles five km south of hodgenville to thomas 
lincoln and nancy hanks lincoln was named after his deceased grandfather who 
was scalped in one seven eight six in an indian raid he had no middle name 
lincoln s parents were uneducated illiterate farmers when lincoln became famous 
reporters and storytellers often exaggerated the poverty and obscurity of his 
birth however lincoln s father thomas was a respected and relatively affluent 
citizen of the kentucky backcountry he had purchased the sinking spring farm in 
december one eight zero eight for two zero zero cash and assumption of a debt 
his parents belonged to a baptist church that had pulled away from a larger 
church because they refused to support slavery from a very young age lincoln 
was exposed to anti slavery sentiment however he never joined his parents 
church or any other church and as a youth ridiculed religion three years after 
purchasing the property a prior land claim filed in hardin circuit court forced 
the lincolns to move thomas continued legal action until he lost the case in 
one eight one five legal expenses contributed to family difficulties in one 
eight one one they were able to lease three zero acres zero one km of a two 
three zero acre zero nine km farm on knob creek a few miles away where they 
then moved in a valley of the rolling fork river this was some of the best 
farmland in the area at this time lincoln s father was a respected community 
member and a successful farmer and carpenter lincoln s earliest recollections 
are from this farm in one eight one five another claimant sought to eject the 
family from the knob creek farm frustrated with litigation and lack of security 
provided by kentucky courts thomas decided to move to indiana which had been 
surveyed by the federal government making land titles more secure it is 
possible that these episodes motivated abraham to later learn surveying and 
become an attorney in one eight one six when lincoln was seven years old he and 
his parents moved to spencer county indiana he would state partly on account of 
slavery and partly because of economic difficulties in kentucky in one eight 
one eight lincoln s mother died of milk sickness at age thirty four when abe 
was nine soon afterwards lincoln s father remarried to sarah bush johnston 
sarah lincoln raised young lincoln like one of her own children years later she 
compared lincoln to her own son saying both were good boys but i must say both 
now being dead that abe was the best boy i ever saw or ever expect to see 
lincoln by david herbert donald one nine nine five in one eight three zero 
after more economic and land title difficulties in indiana the family settled 
on government land on a site selected by lincoln s father in macon county 
illinois the following winter was especially brutal and the family nearly moved 
back to indiana when his father relocated the family to a nearby site the 
following year the two two year old lincoln struck out on his own canoeing down 
the sangamon to sangamon county illinois now in menard county in the village of 
new salem later that year hired by new salem businessman denton offutt and 
accompanied by friends he took goods from new salem to new orleans via flatboat 
on the sangamon illinois and mississippi rivers while in new orleans he may 
have witnessed a slave auction that left an indelible impression on him for the 
rest of his life whether he actually witnessed a slave auction at that time or 
not living in a country with a considerable slave presence he probably saw 
similar atrocities from time to time his formal education consisted of perhaps 
one eight months of schooling from itinerant teachers in effect he was self 
educated studying every book he could borrow he mastered the bible shakespeare 
english history and american history and developed a plain style that puzzled 
audiences more used to orotund oratory he avoided hunting and fishing because 
he did not like killing animals even for food and though unusually tall and 
strong spent so much time reading that some neighbors thought he must be doing 
it to avoid strenuous manual labor he was skilled with an axe they called him 
the rail splitter and a good wrestler young abraham lincoln early career 
lincoln began his political career in one eight three two at the age of two 
three with a campaign for the illinois general assembly as a member of the whig 
party the centerpiece of his platform was the undertaking of navigational 
improvements on the sangamon river in the hopes of attracting steamboat traffic 
to the river which would allow sparsely populated poor areas along and near the 
river to grow and prosper he served as a captain in a company of the illinois 
militia drawn from new salem during the black hawk war although he never saw 
combat he wrote after being elected by his peers that he had not had any such 
success in life which gave him so much satisfaction he later tried and failed 
at several small time business ventures he held an illinois state liquor 
license and sold whiskey finally after coming across the second volume of sir 
william blackstone s four volume commentaries on the laws of england he taught 
himself the law and was admitted to the illinois bar in one eight three seven 
that same year he moved to springfield illinois and began to practice law with 
stephen t logan he became one of the most respected and successful lawyers in 
the prairie state and grew steadily more prosperous lincoln served four 
successive terms in the illinois house of representatives as a representative 
from sangamon county beginning in one eight three four he became a leader of 
the whig party in the legislature in one eight three seven he made his first 
protest against slavery in the illinois house stating that the institution was 
founded on both injustice and bad policy lincoln shared a bed with joshua fry 
speed from one eight three seven to one eight four one in springfield while 
many historians claim it was not uncommon in the mid one nine th century for 
men to share a bed just as two men today may share a house or an apartment gay 
activist c a tripp generated controversy with his two zero zero five book the 
intimate world of abraham lincoln which suggested their relationship may also 
have been sexual in one eight four one lincoln entered law practice with 
william herndon a fellow whig in one eight five six both men joined the 
fledgling republican party following lincoln s assassination herndon began 
collecting stories about lincoln from those who knew him in central illinois 
eventually publishing a book herndon s lincoln lincoln never joined an 
antislavery society and denied he supported the abolitionists he married into a 
prominent slave owning family from kentucky and allowed his children to spend 
time there surrounded by slaves several of his in laws became confederate 
officers he greatly admired the science that flourished in new england and was 
perhaps the only father in illinois at the time to send his son robert todd 
lincoln to elite eastern schools phillips exeter academy and harvard college 
marriage on november four one eight four two at the age of three three lincoln 
married mary todd the couple had four sons robert todd lincoln b august one one 
eight four three in springfield illinois d july two six one nine two six in 
manchester vermont edward baker lincoln b march one zero one eight four six in 
springfield illinois d february one one eight five zero in springfield illinois 
william wallace lincoln b december two one one eight five zero in springfield 
illinois d february two zero one eight six two in washington d c thomas tad 
lincoln b april four one eight five three in springfield illinois d july one 
six one eight seven one in chicago illinois only robert survived into adulthood 
of robert s three children only jessie lincoln had any children two mary 
lincoln beckwith and robert todd lincoln beckwith neither robert beckwith nor 
mary beckwith had any children so abraham lincoln s bloodline ended when robert 
beckwith lincoln s great grandson died on december two four one nine eight five 
illinois politics lincoln in one eight four six or one eight four seven in one 
eight four six lincoln was elected to one term in the u s house of 
representatives a staunch whig lincoln often referred to party leader henry 
clay as his political idol as a freshman house member lincoln was not a 
particularly powerful or influential figure in congress he used his office as 
an opportunity to speak out against the war with mexico which he attributed to 
president polk s desire for military glory that attractive rainbow that rises 
in showers of blood lincoln was a key early supporter of zachary taylor s 
candidacy for the one eight four eight whig presidential nomination when 
lincoln s term ended the incoming taylor administration offered him the 
governorship of remote oregon territory acceptance would end his career in the 
fast growing state of illinois so he declined returning instead to springfield 
illinois he turned most of his energies to making a living at the bar which 
involved extensive travel on horseback from county to county prairie lawyer by 
the mid one eight five zero s lincoln faced competing transportation interests 
both the river barges and the railroads in one eight four nine he received a 
patent related to buoying vessels lincoln represented the alton duff armstrong 
who was on trial for the murder of james preston metzker the case is famous for 
lincoln s use of judicial notice a rare tactic at that time to show an 
eyewitness had lied on the stand claiming he witnessed the crime in the 
moonlight lincoln produced a farmer s almanac to show that the moon on that 
date was at such a low angle it could not have produced enough illumination to 
see anything clearly based upon this evidence armstrong was acquitted 
republican politics one eight five four one eight six zero the kansas nebraska 
act of one eight five four which expressly repealed the limits on slavery s 
spread that had been part of the missouri compromise of one eight two zero drew 
lincoln back into politics illinois democrat stephen a douglas the most 
powerful man in the senate proposed popular sovereignty as the solution to the 
slavery impasse incorporating it into the kansas nebraska act douglas argued 
that in a democracy the people of a territory should decide whether to allow 
slavery or not and not have a decision imposed on them by congress it was a 
speech against kansas nebraska on october one six one eight five four in peoria 
that caused lincoln to stand out among the other free soil orators of the day 
he helped form the new republican party drawing on remnants of the old whig 
free soil liberty and democratic parties in a stirring campaign the republicans 
carried illinois in one eight five four and elected a senator lincoln was the 
obvious choice but to keep party unity he allowed the election to go to his 
colleague lyman trumbull in one eight five seven five eight douglas broke with 
president buchanan leading to a terrific fight for control of the democratic 
party some eastern republicans even favored the reelection of douglas in one 
eight five eight since he led the opposition to the administration s push for 
the lecompton constitution which would have admitted kansas as a slave state 
accepting the republican nomination for the senate in one eight five eight 
lincoln delivered a famous speech in which he stated a house divided against 
itself cannot stand i believe this government cannot endure permanently half 
slave and half free i do not expect the union to be dissolved i do not expect 
the house to fall but i do expect it will cease to be divided it will become 
all one thing or all the other the speech created a lasting image of the danger 
of disunion due to slavery and rallied republicans across the north the one 
eight five eight campaign featured the lincoln douglas debates a nationally 
noticed discussion on the issues that threatened to split the nation in two 
lincoln forced douglas to propose his freeport doctrine which lost him further 
support among slave holders and speeded the division of the democratic party 
though the republican legislative candidates won more popular votes the 
democrats won more seats and the legislature reelected douglas to the senate 
nevertheless lincoln s eloquence transformed him into a national political star 
during the debates of one eight five eight the issue of race was often 
discussed during a time period when racial egalitarianism was considered 
politically incorrect stephen douglas would inform the crowds if you desire 
negro citizenship if you desire them to vote on an equality with yourselves 
then support mr lincoln and the black republican party who are in favor of the 
citizenship of the negro official records of debate on the defensive lincoln 
countered that he was not in favor of bringing about in any way the social and 
political equality of the white and black races official records of debate 
historians generally remained mixed on what lincoln s actual views were on race 
however many tend to doubt that the highly political nature of these debates 
offer reliable evidence about his personal views team of rivals by doris kearns 
goodwin two zero zero five lincoln in text and context by donald fehrenbacher 
one nine eight seven as fredrick douglass observed lincoln was the first great 
man that i talked with in the united states freely who in no single instance 
reminded me of the difference between himself and myself of the difference of 
color life and times of fredrick douglass by fredrick douglass one eight nine 
five lincoln s opposition to slavery was opposition to the slave power and he 
was not an abolitionist in one eight five eight but the civil war changed 
everything and changed lincoln s beliefs in race relations as well election of 
one eight six zero the rail candidate political cartoon one eight six zero 
entering the presidential nomination process as a distinct underdog lincoln was 
eventually chosen as the republican candidate for the one eight six zero 
election for several reasons his expressed views on slavery were seen as more 
moderate than rivals william h seward and salmon chase his western origins also 
appealed to the newer states other contenders especially those with more 
governmental experience had acquired enemies within the party specifically 
seward who had run afoul of newspaperman horace greeley during the campaign 
lincoln was dubbed the rail splitter by republicans to emphasize the power of 
free labor whereby a common farm boy could work his way to the top by his own 
efforts on november six one eight six zero lincoln was elected the one six th 
president of the united states beating democrat douglas john c breckenridge of 
the southern democrats and john c bell of the new constitutional union party 
lincoln was the first republican president he won entirely on the strength of 
his support in the north he was not even on the ballot in nine states in the 
south and won only two of nine nine six counties there lincoln gained one eight 
six five nine zero eight votes three nine nine of the total for one eight zero 
electoral votes douglas one three eight zero two zero two two nine five for one 
two electoral votes breckenridge eight four eight zero one nine one eight one 
for seven two electoral votes and bell five nine zero nine zero one one two 
five for three nine electoral votes there were fusion tickets in some states 
but even if his opponents had combined in every state lincoln had a majority 
vote in all but two of the states in which he won the electoral votes and would 
still have won the electoral college and the election secession winter one 
eight six zero six one as lincoln s election became more and more probable 
secessionists made it clear that their states would leave the union south 
carolina took the lead followed by six other cotton growing states georgia 
florida alabama mississippi louisiana and texas the upper south delaware 
maryland virginia north carolina tennessee kentucky missouri and arkansas 
listened to and rejected the secessionist appeal they decided to stay in the 
union though warning lincoln they would not support an invasion through their 
territory the seven confederate states seceded before lincoln took office 
declaring themselves an entirely new nation the confederate states of america 
president buchanan and president elect lincoln refused to recognize the 
confederacy president elect lincoln survived an assassination threat in 
baltimore and on february two three one eight six one arrived in disguise in 
washington at lincoln s inauguration on march four one eight six one the 
turners formed lincoln s bodyguard and a sizable garrison of federal troops was 
also present ready to protect the capital from confederate invasion or 
insurrection from confederates in the capital city photograph showing march 
four one eight six one inauguration of abraham lincoln in front of u s capitol 
in his first inaugural address lincoln declared i hold that in contemplation of 
universal law and of the constitution the union of these states is perpetual 
perpetuity is implied if not expressed in the fundamental law of all national 
governments arguing further that the purpose of the united states constitution 
was to form a more perfect union than the articles of confederation which were 
explicitly perpetual and thus the constitution too was perpetual he asked 
rhetorically that even were the constitution a simple contract would it not 
require the agreement of all parties to rescind it also in his inaugural 
address in a final attempt to unite the union and prevent the looming war 
lincoln supported the proposed corwin amendment to the constitution of which he 
had been a driving force it would have explicitly protected slavery in those 
states in which it already existed and had already passed both houses lincoln 
adamantly opposed the crittenden compromise however which would have permitted 
slavery in the territories renewing the boundary set by the missouri compromise 
and extending it to california despite support for this compromise among some 
republicans lincoln declared that were the crittenden compromise accepted it 
would amount to a perpetual covenant of war against every people tribe and 
state owning a foot of land between here and tierra del fuego because 
opposition to slavery expansion was the key issue uniting the republican party 
at the time lincoln is sometimes criticized for putting politics ahead of the 
national interest in refusing any compromise allowing the expansion of slavery 
supporters of lincoln however point out that he did not oppose slavery because 
he was a republican but became a republican because of his opposition to the 
expansion of slavery that he opposed several other republicans who were in 
favor of compromise and that he clearly thought his course of action was in the 
national interest by the time lincoln took office the confederacy was an 
established fact and not a single leader of that country ever proposed 
rejoining the union on any terms no compromise was found because no compromise 
was possible lincoln perhaps could have allowed the southern states to secede 
and some republicans recommended that however conservative democratic 
nationalists such as jeremiah s black joseph holt and edwin m stanton had taken 
control of buchanan s cabinet around january one one eight six one and refused 
to accept secession lincoln and nearly all republican leaders adopted this 
nationalistic position by march one eight six one the union could not be broken 
war begins one eight six one one eight six two after union troops at fort 
sumter were fired on and forced to surrender in april lincoln called on 
governors of every state to send seven five zero zero zero troops to recapture 
forts protect the capital and preserve the union which in his view still 
existed intact despite the actions of the seceding states virginia which had 
repeatedly warned lincoln it would not allow an invasion of its territory or 
join an attack on another state then seceded along with north carolina 
tennessee and arkansas the slave states of missouri kentucky maryland and 
delaware did not secede and lincoln urgently negotiated with state leaders 
there promising not to interfere with slavery in loyal states emancipation 
proclamation lincoln met with his cabinet for the first reading of the 
emancipation proclamation draft on july two two one eight six two congress in 
july one eight six two moved to free the slaves by passing the second 
confiscation act it provided that if any person shall hereafter incite set on 
foot assist or engage in any rebellion or insurrection against the authority of 
the united states or the laws thereof or shall give aid or comfort thereto or 
shall engage in or give aid and comfort to any such existing rebellion or 
insurrection and be convicted thereof such person shall be punished by 
imprisonment for a period not exceeding ten years or by a fine not exceeding 
ten thousand dollars and by the liberation of all his slaves if any he have or 
by both of said punishments at the discretion of the court sec nine and be it 
further enacted that all slaves of persons who shall hereafter be engaged in 
rebellion against the government of the united states or who shall in any way 
give aid or comfort thereto escaping from such persons and taking refuge within 
the lines of the army and all slaves captured from such persons or deserted by 
them and coming under the control of the government of the united states and 
all slaves of such person found on or being within any place occupied by rebel 
forces and afterwards occupied by the forces of the united states shall be 
deemed captives of war and shall be forever free of their servitude and not 
again held as slaves thus everyone who six zero days after july one seven one 
eight six two supported the rebellion was to be punished by having all their 
slaves freed the goal was to weaken the rebellion which was led and controlled 
by slave owners this did not abolish the legal institution of slavery the xiii 
amendment did that but it shows lincoln had the support of and was even 
somewhat pushed by congress in liberating the slaves owned by rebels lincoln 
implemented the new law by his emancipation proclamation lincoln is well known 
for ending slavery in the united states and he personally opposed slavery as a 
profound moral evil not in accord with the principle of equality asserted in 
the declaration of independence yet lincoln s views of the role of the federal 
government on the subject of slavery are more complicated before the 
confederate states seceded lincoln had campaigned against the expansion of 
slavery into the territories where congress did have authority however he 
maintained that the federal government could not constitutionally bar slavery 
in states where it already existed during his presidency lincoln made it clear 
that the north was fighting the war to preserve the union not to abolish 
slavery freeing the slaves was a war measure to weaken the rebellion by 
destroying the economic base of its leadership class lincoln was criticized 
both at home and abroad for his refusal to take a stand for the complete 
abolition of slavery on august two two one eight six two a few weeks before 
signing the proclamation and after it had already been drafted lincoln 
responded by letter to an editorial by horace greeley of the new york tribune 
which had urged abolition i would save the union i would save it the shortest 
way under the constitution the sooner the national authority can be restored 
the nearer the union will be the union as it was if there be those who would 
not save the union unless they could at the same time save slavery i do not 
agree with them if there be those who would not save the union unless they 
could at the same time destroy slavery i do not agree with them my paramount 
object in this struggle is to save the union and is not either to save or to 
destroy slavery if i could save the union without freeing any slave i would do 
it and if i could save it by freeing all the slaves i would do it and if i 
could save it by freeing some and leaving others alone i would also do that 
what i do about slavery and the colored race i do because i believe it helps to 
save the union and what i forbear i forbear because i do not believe it would 
help to save the union i shall do less whenever i shall believe what i am doing 
hurts the cause and i shall do more whenever i shall believe doing more will 
help the cause i shall try to correct errors when shown to be errors and i 
shall adopt new views so fast as they shall appear to be true views i have here 
stated my purpose according to my view of official duty and i intend no 
modification of my oft expressed personal wish that all men everywhere could be 
free with the emancipation proclamation issued in two parts on september two 
two one eight six two and january one one eight six three lincoln made the 
abolition of slavery a goal of the war lincoln addresses the issue of his 
consistency or lack thereof between his earlier position and his later position 
on emancipation in an one eight six four letter to albert g hodges lincoln is 
often credited with freeing enslaved african americans with the emancipation 
proclamation however border states that still allowed slavery but were under 
union control were exempt from the emancipation because they were not covered 
under any war measures the proclamation on its first day january one one eight 
six three freed only a few escaped slaves but as union armies advanced south 
more and more slaves were liberated until hundreds of thousands were freed 
exactly how many is unknown lincoln signed the proclamation as a wartime 
measure insisting that only the outbreak of war gave constitutional power to 
the president to free slaves in states where it already existed he later said i 
never in my life felt more certain that i was doing right than i do in signing 
this paper the proclamation made abolishing slavery in the rebel states an 
official war goal and it became the impetus for the enactment of the one three 
th amendment to the united states constitution which abolished slavery lincoln 
was one of the main promoters of that amendment although some northern 
conservatives recoiled at the notion that the war was now being fought for the 
slaves instead of for preserving the union in the end the emancipation 
proclamation did much to help the northern cause politically lincoln s strong 
abolitionist stand finally convinced the united kingdom of great britain and 
ireland and other foreign countries that they could not support the confederate 
states of america this move remains one of the great seizures of private 
property by the federal government restoring the ownership of the blacks to 
themselves lincoln had for some time been working on plans to set up colonies 
in africa and south america for the nearly four million newly freed slaves he 
remarked upon colonization favorably in the emancipation proclamation but all 
attempts at such a massive undertaking failed important domestic measures of 
lincoln s first term while lincoln is usually portrayed bearded he first grew a 
beard in one eight six one at the suggestion of one one year old grace bedell 
lincoln believed in the whig theory of the presidency which left congress to 
write the laws he was anti vescovian he signed them vetoing only bills that 
threatened his war powers thus he signed the homestead act in one eight six two 
making available millions of acres of government held land in the west for 
purchase at very low cost the morrill land grant colleges act also signed in 
one eight six two provided government grants for agricultural universities in 
each state lincoln also signed the pacific railway acts of one eight six two 
and one eight six four which granted federal support to the construction of the 
united states first transcontinental railroad which was completed in one eight 
six nine the most important legislation involved money matters including the 
first income tax and higher tariffs most important was the creation of the 
system of national banks by the national banking acts of one eight six three 
one eight six four and one eight six five which allowed the creation of a 
strong national financial system lincoln sent a senior general to put down the 
sioux uprising of august one eight six two in minnesota presented with three 
zero three death warrants for convicted santee dakota who had massacred 
innocent farmers lincoln affirmed three nine of these for execution one was 
later reprieved one eight six four election and second inauguration after union 
victories at gettysburg vicksburg and chattanooga in one eight six three many 
in the north believed that victory was soon to come after lincoln appointed u s 
grant general in chief on march one two one eight six four although no 
president since andrew jackson had been elected to a second term and none since 
van buren had been re nominated lincoln s re election was considered a 
certainty however when the spring campaigns east and west all turned into 
bloody stalemates northern morale dipped and lincoln seemed less likely to be 
re nominated treasury secretary salmon p chase strongly desired the republican 
nomination and was working hard to win it while john fremont was nominated by a 
breakoff group of radical republicans potentially taking away crucial votes in 
the november elections fearing he might lose the election lincoln wrote out and 
signed the following pledge but did not show it to his cabinet asking them each 
to sign the sealed envelope lincoln wrote this morning as for some days past it 
seems exceedingly probable that this administration will not be re elected then 
it will be my duty to so co operate with the president elect as to save the 
union between the election and the inauguration as he will have secured his 
election on such ground that he can not possibly save it afterwards the 
democrats hoping to make setbacks in the war a top campaign issue waited until 
late summer to nominate a candidate their platform was heavily influenced by 
the peace wing of the party calling the war a failure but their candidate 
former general george mcclellan was a war democrat determined to prosecute the 
war until the union was restored although willing to compromise on all other 
issues including slavery mcclellan s candidacy was soon undercut as on 
september one just two days after the convention atlanta was abandoned by the 
confederate army coming on the heels of david farragut s capture of mobile bay 
and followed by phil sheridan s crushing victory over jubal early s army at 
cedar creek it was now apparent that the tide had turned in favor of the union 
and that lincoln may be reelected despite the costs of the war still lincoln 
believed that he would win the electoral vote by only a slim margin failing to 
give him the mandate he d need if he was to push his lenient reconstruction 
plan to his surprise lincoln ended up winning all but two states capturing two 
one two of two three three electoral votes after lincoln s election on march 
four one eight six five he delivered his second inaugural address which was his 
favorite of all his speeches at this time a victory over the rebels was within 
sight slavery had effectively ended and lincoln was looking to the future 
fondly do we hope fervently do we pray that this mighty scourge of war may 
speedily pass away yet if god wills that it continue until all the wealth piled 
by the bond man s two hundred and fifty years of unrequited toil shall be sunk 
and until every drop of blood drawn with the lash shall be paid by another 
drawn with the sword as was said three thousand years ago so still it must be 
said the judgments of the lord are true and righteous altogether with malice 
toward none with charity for all with firmness in the right as god gives us to 
see the right let us strive on to finish the work we are in to bind up the 
nation s wounds to care for him who shall have borne the battle and for his 
widow and his orphan to do all which may achieve and cherish a just and lasting 
peace among ourselves and with all nations civil war and reconstruction 
conducting the war effort the war was a source of constant frustration for the 
president and it occupied nearly all of his time lincoln had a contentious 
relationship with general george b mcclellan who became general in chief of all 
the union armies in the wake of the embarrassing union defeat at the first 
battle of bull run and after the retirement of winfield scott in late one eight 
six one lincoln wished to take an active part in planning the war strategy 
despite his inexperience in military affairs lincoln s strategic priorities 
were two fold first to ensure that washington d c was well defended and second 
to conduct an aggressive war effort in hopes of ending the war quickly and 
appeasing the northern public and press who pushed for an offensive war 
mcclellan a youthful west point graduate and railroad executive called back to 
military service took a more cautious approach mcclellan took several months to 
plan and execute his peninsula campaign which involved capturing richmond by 
moving the army of the potomac by boat to the peninsula between the james and 
york rivers mcclellan s delay irritated lincoln as did mcclellan s insistence 
that no troops were needed to defend washington d c lincoln insisted on holding 
some of mcclellan s troops to defend the capital a decision mcclellan blamed 
for the ultimate failure of his peninsula campaign mcclellan a lifelong 
democrat who was temperamentally conservative was relieved as general in chief 
after releasing his harrison s landing letter where he offered unsolicited 
political advice to lincoln urging caution in the war effort mcclellan s letter 
incensed radical republicans who successfully pressured lincoln to appoint 
fellow republican john pope as head of the new army of virginia pope complied 
with lincoln s strategic desire for the union to move towards richmond from the 
north thus guarding washington d c however pope was soundly defeated at the 
second battle of bull run during the summer of one eight six two forcing the 
army of the potomac back into the defenses of washington for a second time pope 
was sent to minnesota to fight the sioux panicked by confederate general robert 
e lee s invasion of maryland lincoln restored mcclellan to command of all 
forces around washington in time for the battle of antietam in september one 
eight six two it was the union victory in that battle that allowed lincoln to 
release his emancipation proclamation lincoln relieved mcclellan of command 
shortly after the one eight six two midterm elections and appointed republican 
ambrose burnside to head the army of the potomac who promised to follow through 
on lincoln s strategic vision for an aggressive offensive against lee and 
richmond after burnside was stunningly defeated at fredericksburg joseph hooker 
was given command despite his idle talk about becoming a military strong man 
hooker was routed by lee at chancellorsville in may one eight six three and 
also relieved of command after the union victory at gettysburg meade s failure 
to pursue lee and months of inactivity for the army of the potomac lincoln 
decided to bring in a western general general ulysses s grant he had a solid 
string of victories in the western theater including vicksburg and chattanooga 
earlier reacting to criticism of grant lincoln was quoted as saying i cannot 
spare this man he fights grant waged his bloody overland campaign in one eight 
six four using a strategy of a war of attrition characterized by high union 
losses at battles such as the wilderness and cold harbor but by proportionately 
higher losses in the confederate army grant s aggressive campaign would 
eventually bottle up lee in the siege of petersburg and result in the union 
taking richmond and bringing the war to a close in the spring of one eight six 
five lincoln authorized grant to use a scorched earth approach to destroy the 
south s morale and economic ability to continue the war this allowed generals 
william tecumseh sherman and philip sheridan to destroy farms and towns in the 
shenandoah valley georgia and south carolina the damage in sherman s march to 
the sea through georgia totaled in excess of one zero zero million lincoln had 
a star crossed record as a military leader possessing a keen understanding of 
strategic points such as the mississippi river and the fortress city of 
vicksburg and the importance of defeating the enemy s army rather than simply 
capturing cities however he had little success in his efforts to motivate his 
generals to adopt his strategies eventually he found in grant a man who shared 
his vision of the war and was able to bring that vision to reality with his 
relentless pursuit of coordinated offensives in multiple theaters of war 
lincoln perhaps reflecting his lack of military experience developed a keen 
curiosity with military campaigning during the war he spent hours at the war 
department telegraph office reading dispatches from his generals through many a 
night he frequently visited battle sites and seemed fascinated by watching 
scenes of war during jubal a early s raid into washington d c in one eight six 
four lincoln had to be told to duck his head to avoid being shot while 
observing the scenes of battle homefront lincoln was more successful in giving 
the war meaning to northern civilians through his oratorical skills despite his 
meager education and backwoods upbringing lincoln possessed an extraordinary 
command of the english language as evidenced by the gettysburg address a speech 
dedicating a cemetery of union soldiers from the battle of gettysburg that he 
delivered on november one nine one eight six three while the featured speaker 
orator edward everett spoke for two hours lincoln s few choice words resonated 
across the nation and across history defying lincoln s own prediction that the 
world will little note nor long remember what we say here lincoln s second 
inaugural address is also greatly admired and often quoted in these speeches 
lincoln articulated better than any of his contemporaries the rationale behind 
the union effort during the civil war lincoln exercised powers no previous 
president had wielded he proclaimed a blockade suspended the writ of habeas 
corpus spent money without congressional authorization and imprisoned thousands 
of accused confederate sympathizers without trial there is a fragment of 
uncorraborated evidence that lincoln made contingency plans to arrest chief 
justice roger brooke taney though the allegation remains unresolved and 
controversial see the taney arrest warrant controversy the long war and the 
issue of emancipation appeared to be severely hampering his prospects and 
pessimists warned that defeat appeared likely lincoln ran under the union party 
banner composed of war democrats and republicans general grant was facing 
severe criticism for his conduct of the bloody overland campaign that summer 
and the seemingly endless siege of petersburg however the union capture of the 
key railroad center of atlanta by sherman s forces in september changed the 
situation dramatically and lincoln was reelected reconstruction the 
reconstruction of the union weighed heavy on the president s mind throughout 
the war effort he was determined to take a course that would not permanently 
alienate the former confederate states and throughout the war lincoln urged 
speedy elections under generous terms in areas behind union lines this 
irritated congressional republicans who urged a more stringent reconstruction 
policy one of lincoln s few vetoes during his term was of the wade davis bill 
an effort by congressional republicans to impose harsher reconstruction terms 
on the confederate areas republicans in congress retaliated by refusing to seat 
representatives elected from louisiana arkansas and tennessee during the war 
under lincoln s generous terms let em up easy he told his assembled military 
leaders gen ulysses s grant a future president gen william t sherman and adm 
david dixon porter in an one eight six five meeting on the steamer river queen 
when richmond the confederate capital was at long last captured lincoln went 
there to make a public gesture of sitting at jefferson davis s own desk 
symbolically saying to the nation that the president of the united states held 
authority over the entire land he was greeted at the city as a conquering hero 
by freed slaves whose sentiments were epitomized by one admirer s quote i know 
i am free for i have seen the face of father abraham and have felt him on april 
nine one eight six five confederate general robert e lee surrendered at 
appomattox court house in virginia this left only joseph johnston s forces in 
the east to deal with weeks later johnston would defy jefferson davis and 
surrender his forces to sherman of course lincoln would not survive to see the 
surrender of all confederate forces just five days after lee surrendered 
lincoln was assassinated he was the first president to be assassinated and the 
third to die in office assassination the assassination of abraham lincoln from 
left to right henry rathbone clara harris mary todd lincoln lincoln and booth 
lincoln had met frequently with lt gen ulysses s grant as the war drew to a 
close the two men planned matters of reconstruction and it was evident to all 
that they held each other in high regard during their last meeting on april one 
four one eight six five good friday lincoln invited grant to a social 
engagement that evening grant declined grant s wife julia dent grant is said to 
have strongly disliked mary todd lincoln the president s eldest son robert todd 
lincoln also turned down the invitation john wilkes booth a well known actor 
and southern sympathizer from maryland heard that the president and mrs lincoln 
along with the grants would be attending ford s theatre having failed in a plot 
to kidnap lincoln earlier booth informed his co conspirators of his intention 
to kill lincoln others were assigned to assassinate vice president andrew 
johnson and secretary of state william seward without his bodyguard ward hill 
lamon to whom he related his famous dream of his own assassination the lincolns 
left to attend the play at ford s theater the play our american cousin was a 
musical comedy by the british writer tom taylor as lincoln sat in his state box 
in the balcony booth crept up behind the president s box and waited for the 
funniest line of the play hoping the laughter would cover the gunshot noise on 
stage actor harry hawk said the last words lincoln would ever hear well i guess 
i know enough to turn you inside out old gal you sockdologizing old man trap 
when the laughter came booth jumped into the box the president was in and aimed 
a single shot round slug four four caliber deringer at his head firing at point 
blank range the bullet entered behind lincoln s left ear and lodged behind his 
right eyeball major henry rathbone who was present in the presidential box 
momentarily grappled with booth but was severely stabbed and slashed by the 
assassin it was believed that booth then shouted sic semper tyrannis latin thus 
always to tyrants the state motto of virginia some accounts say he added the 
south is avenged and jumped from the balcony to the stage below breaking his 
leg despite his injury booth managed to limp to his horse and make his escape 
as booth fled from the theater a young physician dr charles leale made his way 
through the audience to lincoln s box leale quickly assessed the wound as 
mortal the president was taken across the street from the theater to the 
petersen house where he lay in a coma for nine hours before he expired several 
physicians attended lincoln including u s army surgeon general joseph k barnes 
of the army medical museum using a probe barnes located some fragments of 
lincoln s skull and the ball lodged six inches inside his brain lincoln who 
never regained consciousness was officially pronounced dead at seven two two a 
m the next morning april one five one eight six five upon his death secretary 
of war edwin stanton lamented now he belongs to the ages after lincoln s body 
was returned to the white house his body was prepared for his lying in state in 
the east room the army medical museum now named the national museum of health 
and medicine has retained in its collection since the time of lincoln s death 
several artifacts relating to the assassination currently on display in the 
museum are the bullet that was fired from the deringer pistol ending lincoln s 
life the probe used by barnes pieces of his skull and hair and the surgeon s 
cuff stained with lincoln s blood the museum can be found at www hmhm 
washingtondc museum lincoln s funeral train carried his remains as well as 
three zero zero mourners and the casket of his son william one six five four 
miles to illinois lincoln s body was carried by train in a grand funeral 
procession through several states on its way back to illinois the nation 
mourned a man whom many viewed as the savior of the united states he was buried 
in oak ridge cemetery in springfield where a one seven seven foot five four m 
tall granite tomb surmounted with several bronze statues of lincoln was 
constructed by one eight seven four to prevent repeated attempts to steal 
lincoln s body and hold it for ransom robert todd lincoln had lincoln exhumed 
and reinterred in concrete several feet thick on september two six one nine 
zero one presidential appointments administration and cabinet lincoln was known 
for appointing his enemies and political rivals to high positions in his 
cabinet not only did he use great political skill in reducing potential 
political opposition but he felt he was appointing the best qualified person 
for the good of the country supreme court lincoln appointed the following 
justices to the supreme court of the united states noah haynes swayne one eight 
six two samuel freeman miller one eight six two david davis one eight six two 
stephen johnson field one eight six three salmon p chase chief justice one 
eight six four major presidential acts involvement as president elect morrill 
tariff of one eight six one corwin amendment enacted as president signed 
revenue act of one eight six one signed homestead act signed morill land grant 
college act signed internal revenue act of one eight six two signed pacific 
railway acts of one eight six two and one eight six four established department 
of agriculture one eight six two signed national banking act of one eight six 
three signed internal revenue act of one eight six four states admitted to the 
union west virginia one eight six three nevada one eight six four legacy and 
memorials lincoln s death made the president a martyr to many today he is 
perhaps america s second most famous and beloved president after george 
washington repeated polls of historians have ranked lincoln as among the 
greatest presidents in u s history among contemporary admirers lincoln is 
usually seen as a figure who personifies daniel chester french s seated lincoln 
faces the national mall to the east lincoln s bust on mt rushmore classical 
values of honesty integrity as well as respect for individual and minority 
rights and human freedom in general many american organizations of all purposes 
and agendas continue to cite his name and image with interests ranging from the 
gay rights group log cabin republicans to the insurance corporation lincoln 
financial the lincoln automobile is also named after him over the years lincoln 
has been memorialized in many city names notably the capital of nebraska with 
the lincoln memorial in washington d c pictured right on the u s five bill and 
the one cent coin illinois is the primary opponent to the removal of the penny 
from circulation and as part of the mount rushmore national memorial lincoln s 
tomb lincoln home national historic site in springfield new salem illinois a 
reconstruction of lincoln s early adult hometown ford s theater and petersen 
house are all preserved as museums the state nickname for illinois is land of 
lincoln counties in one eight u s states arkansas colorado idaho kansas 
minnesota mississippi montana nebraska nevada new mexico oklahoma oregon south 
dakota tennessee west virginia washington wisconsin and wyoming are named after 
lincoln on february one two one eight nine two abraham lincoln s birthday was 
declared to be a federal holiday in the united states although in one nine 
seven one it was combined with washington s birthday in the form of president s 
day february one two is still observed as a separate legal holiday in many 
states including illinois lincoln s birthplace and family home are national 
historic memorials abraham lincoln birthplace national historic site in 
hodgenville kentucky and lincoln home national historic site in springfield 
illinois the abraham lincoln presidential library and museum is also in 
springfield the abraham lincoln national cemetery is located in elwood illinois 
statues of lincoln can be found in other countries in ciudad ju rez chihuahua 
mexico is a one three foot high bronze statue a gift from the united states 
dedicated in one nine six six by president lyndon b johnson the u s received a 
statue of benito ju rez in exchange which is in washington d c ju rez and 
lincoln exchanged friendly letters and mexico remembers lincoln s opposition to 
the mexican american war there is also a statue in tijuana mexico showing 
lincoln standing and destroying the chains of slavery there are at least three 
statues of lincoln in the united kingdom one in london by augustus st gaudens 
one in manchester by george grey barnard and another in edinburgh by george 
bissell the ballistic missile submarine abraham lincoln ssbn six zero two and 
the aircraft carrier abraham lincoln cvn seven two were named in his honor also 
the liberty ship ss nancy hanks was named to honor his mother in a recent 
public vote entitled the greatest american lincoln placed second placing first 
was ronald reagan lincoln in popular culture trivia lincoln stood six three 
three four one nine two four cm tall and thus was the tallest president in u s 
history just edging out lyndon johnson at six three one two one nine one eight 
cm he was born on the same day as charles darwin the last surviving self 
described witness to lincoln s assassination was samuel j seymour one eight six 
zero april one four one nine five six who appeared two months before his death 
at age nine six on the cbs tv quiz show i ve got a secret he said that as a 
five year old he had thought at first that he himself had been shot because his 
nurse trying to fix a torn place in his blouse stuck him with a pin at the 
moment of the gun s discharge according to legend lincoln was referred to as 
two faced by his opponent in the one eight five eight senate election stephen 
douglas upon hearing about this lincoln jokingly replied if i had another face 
to wear do you really think i would be wearing this one according to legend 
lincoln also said as a young man on his appearance one day when looking in the 
mirror it s a fact abe you are the ugliest man in the world if ever i see a man 
uglier than you i m going to shoot him on the spot it would no doubt he thought 
be an act of mercy based on written descriptions of lincoln including the 
observations that he was much taller than most men of his day and had long 
limbs an abnormally shaped chest and loose or lax joints it has been 
conjectured since the one nine six zero s that lincoln may have suffered from 
marfan syndrome lincoln was known to have a case of depression during his time 
in new salem illinois his fiancee died and that triggered his depression his 
close friends watched over him to make sure he did not commit suicide he also 
suffered from nightmares during his term in the white house his depression got 
so severe he had to hold a cabinet meeting from his bed he once mentioned one 
of his haunting nightmares to his friend lincoln mentioned that he was standing 
in a mourning crowd surrounding a train and when he asked a grieving woman what 
had happened she replied the president has been shot and he has died lincoln is 
the only american president to hold a patent the patent is for a device that 
lifts boats over shoals see also origins of the american civil war american 
system lincoln s economic beliefs lincoln kennedy coincidences list of u s 
presidential religious affiliations movies d w griffith s abraham lincoln the 
dramatic life of abraham lincoln abraham lincoln presidential library and 
museum references biographies lincoln by david herbert donald one nine nine 
nine isbn zero six eight four eight two five three five x very well reviewed by 
scholars donald has won two pulitzer prizes for biography abraham lincoln and 
civil war america a biography by william e gienapp isbn zero one nine five one 
five zero nine nine six two zero zero two short team of rivals the political 
genius of abraham lincoln by doris kearns goodwin isbn zero six eight four 
eight two four nine zero six two zero zero five reviewers report it is very 
well written abraham lincoln redeemer president by allen c guelzo isbn zero 
eight zero two eight three eight seven two three one nine nine nine abraham 
lincoln a history one eight nine zero by john hay online at volume one and 
volume two one zero volumes in all written by lincoln s top aides the real 
abraham lincoln by reinhard h luthin one nine six zero well regarded by 
reviewers the abraham lincoln encyclopedia by mark e neely one nine eight four 
detailed articles on many men and movements associated with al the last best 
hope of earth abraham lincoln and the promise of america by mark e neely one 
nine nine three pulitzer prize winning author with malice toward none the life 
of abraham lincoln by stephen b oates one nine nine four lincoln the president 
by james g randall four vol one nine four five five five reprint two zero zero 
zero by prize winning scholar mr lincoln excerpts ed by richard n current one 
nine five seven abraham lincoln the prairie years two vol one nine two six the 
war years four vol one nine three nine biography by carl sandburg pulitzer 
prize winner by famous poet abraham lincoln a biography by benjamin p thomas 
one nine five two specialty topics baker jean h mary todd lincoln a biography 
one nine eight seven belz herman abraham lincoln constitutionalism and equal 
rights in the civil war era one nine nine eight boritt gabor s lincoln and the 
economics of the american dream one nine nine four lincoln s economic theory 
and policies boritt gabor s lincoln the war president one nine nine four boritt 
gabor s ed the historian s lincoln urbana university of illinois press one nine 
eight eight historiography bruce robert v lincoln and the tools of war one nine 
five six on weapons development during the war donald david herbert lincoln 
reconsidered essays on the civil war era one nine six zero foner eric free soil 
free labor free men the ideology of the republican party before the civil war 
one nine seven zero intellectual history of different prewar faction s in al s 
party harris william c with charity for all lincoln and the restoration of the 
union one nine nine seven al s plans for reconstruction hendrick burton j 
lincoln s war cabinet one nine four six hofstadter richard the american 
political tradition and the men who made it one nine four eight ch five abraham 
lincoln and the self made myth holzer harold lincoln at cooper union the speech 
that made abraham lincoln president two zero zero four mcpherson james m 
abraham lincoln and the second american revolution one nine nine two mcpherson 
james m battle cry of freedom the civil war era one nine eight eight pulitzer 
prize winner surveys all aspects of the war morgenthau hans j and david hein 
essays on lincoln s faith and politics lanham md university press of america 
for the white burkett miller center of public affairs at the university of 
virginia one nine eight three neely mark e the fate of liberty abraham lincoln 
and civil liberties one nine nine two pulitzer prize winner philip s paludan 
the presidency of abraham lincoln one nine nine four reviewers call it the most 
thorough treatment of al s administration lincoln in american memory by merrill 
d peterson one nine nine four how lincoln was remembered after one eight six 
five randall james g lincoln the liberal statesman one nine four seven 
richardson heather cox the greatest nation of the earth republican economic 
policies during the civil war one nine nine seven shenk joshua wolf lincoln s 
melancholy how depression challenged a president and fueled his greatness two 
zero zero five named one of the best books of two zero zero five by the 
washington post the new york times and the atlanta journal constitution lincoln 
by gore vidal isbn zero three seven five seven zero eight seven six six a novel 
lincoln and his generals by t harry williams one nine six seven lincoln at 
gettysburg the words that remade america by garry wills isbn zero six seven one 
eight six seven four two three honor s voice the transformation of abraham 
lincoln by douglas l wilson one nine nine nine lincoln in art and popular 
culture bullard f lauriston lincoln in marble and bronze rutgers university 
press new brunswick new jersey one nine five two mead fanklin b heroic statues 
in bronze of abraham lincoln introducing the hoosier youth by paul manship the 
lincoln national life foundation fort wayne indiana one nine three two moffatt 
frederick c errant bronzes george grey barnard s statues of abraham lincoln 
university of deleware press newark de one nine nine eight murry freeman henry 
morris emancipation anf the freed in american sculpture books for libraries 
press the black heritage library collection freeport ny one nine seven two 
originally published in one nine one six petz weldon michigan s monumental 
tributes to abraham lincoln historical society of michigan one nine eight seven 
redway maurine whorton and dorothy kendall bracken marks of lincoln on our land 
hastings house publishers new york one nine five seven savage kirk standing 
soldiers kneeling slaves race war and monument in nineteenth century america 
princeton university press princeton new jersey one nine nine seven tice george 
lincoln rutgers university press new brunswick new jersey one nine eight four 
the real lincoln by thomas dilorenzo isbn zero seven six one five two six four 
six three a stinging neo confederate attack on lincoln as evil two zero zero 
two primary sources basler roy p ed collected works of abraham lincoln nine 
vols new brunswick nj rutgers univ press one nine five three five five basler 
roy p ed abraham lincoln his speeches and writings one nine four six lincoln 
abraham lincoln speeches and writings two vol library of america edition one 
nine eight nine lincoln abraham the life and writings of abraham lincoln modern 
library classics ed by philip van doren stern two zero zero zero external links 
white house biography abraham lincoln papers at the library of congress one 
eight five zero one eight six five the controversial photograph of lincoln in 
death the lincoln institute abraham lincoln in united states census records 
especially for students an overview of abraham lincoln s life mr lincoln s 
virtual library speeches and quotes by abraham lincoln poetry written by 
abraham lincoln lincoln memorial tour my big adventure three three images 
abraham lincoln research site abraham lincoln online the collected works of 
abraham lincoln lincoln studies center at knox college discussion of john 
drinkwater s play abraham lincoln original one eight six zero s harper s weekly 
images and news on abraham lincoln the lincoln log a daily chronology of the 
life of abraham lincoln lincoln memorial washington dc the lincoln museum fort 
wayne indiana the lincoln prize a national book award sponsored by the gilder 
lehrman institute of american history and the civil war institute at gettysburg 
college abraham lincoln s assassination john summerfield staples president 
lincoln s substitute us six four six nine patent manner of buoying vessels a 
lincoln one eight four nine king lincoln an archive of articles on lincoln 
national park service abraham lincoln birthplace includes good early history 
hoard historical museum in fort atkinson wisconsin with lincoln library on the 
question of lincoln s sexuality medical and health history of abraham lincoln 
biography world of biography project gutenberg etexts list of a compilation of 
the messages and papers of the presidents volume six part one abraham lincoln 
lincoln s yarns and stories volume one and volume two of abraham lincoln a 
history one eight nine zero by john hay one eight three five to one nine zero 
five john george nicolay one eight three two to one nine zero one the boys life 
of abraham lincoln one nine zero seven by nicolay helen one eight six six to 
one nine five four the life of abraham lincoln one nine zero one by henry 
ketcham volume one and volume two of abraham lincoln one eight nine nine by 
john t morse the every day life of abraham lincoln one nine one three by 
francis fisher browne abraham lincoln the people s leader in the struggle for 
national existence one nine zero nine by george haven putnam litt d lincoln s 
personal life one nine two two by nathaniel w stephenson before john henry 
after thomas langrell harris years one eight four seven one eight four nine one 
eight zero nine births one eight six five deaths abraham lincoln american civil 
war people american lawyers assassinated politicians autodidacts cat lovers 
firearm deaths humanists humanitarians members of the illinois house of 
representatives members of the united states house of representatives from 
illinois murder victims people from kentucky presidents of the united states 
republican party united states presidential nominees united states army 
officers united states senate candidates welsh americans aristotle aristotel s 
three eight four bc march seven three two two bc was an ancient greek 
philosopher who studied with plato and taught alexander the great he wrote 
books on many subjects including physics poetry zoology logic rhetoric 
government and biology aristotle along with plato and socrates is generally 
considered one of the most influential of ancient greek philosophers they 
transformed presocratic greek philosophy into the foundations of western 
philosophy as we know it the writings of plato and aristotle founded two of the 
most important schools of ancient philosophy aristotle valued knowledge gained 
from the senses and in modern terms would be classed among the modern 
empiricists see materialism and empiricism he also achieved a grounding of 
dialectic in the topics by allowing interlocutors to begin from commonly held 
beliefs endoxa his goal being non contradiction rather than truth he set the 
stage for what would eventually develop into the empiricist version of 
scientific method centuries later although he wrote dialogues early in his 
career no more than fragments of these have survived the works of aristotle 
that still exist today are in treatise form and were for the most part 
unpublished texts these were probably lecture notes or texts used by his 
students and were almost certainly revised repeatedly over the course of years 
as a result these works tend to be eclectic dense and difficult to read among 
the most important ones are physics metaphysics or ontology nicomachean ethics 
politics de anima on the soul and poetics these works although connected in 
many fundamental ways are very different in both style and substance aristotle 
is known for being one of the few figures in history who studied almost every 
subject possible at the time in science aristotle studied anatomy astronomy 
economics embryology geography geology meteorology physics and zoology in 
philosophy aristotle wrote on aesthetics ethics government metaphysics politics 
psychology rhetoric and theology he also dealt with education foreign customs 
literature and poetry his combined works practically constitute an encyclopedia 
of greek knowledge biography early life and studies at the academy a bust of 
aristotle is a nearly ubiquitous ornament in places of high culture in the west 
aristotle was born at stageira a colony of andros on the macedonian peninsula 
of chalcidice in three eight four bc his father nicomachus was court physician 
to king amyntas iii of macedon it is believed that aristotle s ancestors held 
this position under various kings of the macedons as such aristotle s early 
education would probably have consisted of instruction in medicine and biology 
from his father about his mother phaestis little is known it is known that she 
died early in aristotle s life when nicomachus also died in aristotle s tenth 
year he was left an orphan and placed under the guardianship of his uncle 
proxenus of atarneus he taught aristotle greek rhetoric and poetry o connor et 
al two zero zero four aristotle was probably influenced by his father s medical 
knowledge when he went to athens at the age of one eight he was likely already 
trained in the investigation of natural phenomena from the age of one eight to 
three seven aristotle remained in athens as a pupil of plato and distinguished 
himself at the academy the relations between plato and aristotle have formed 
the subject of various legends many of which depict aristotle unfavourably no 
doubt there were divergences of opinion between plato who took his stand on 
sublime idealistic principles and aristotle who even at that time showed a 
preference for the investigation of the facts and laws of the physical world it 
is also probable that plato suggested that aristotle needed restraining rather 
than encouragement but not that there was an open breach of friendship in fact 
aristotle s conduct after the death of plato his continued association with 
xenocrates and other platonists and his allusions in his writings to plato s 
doctrines prove that while there were conflicts of opinion between plato and 
aristotle there was no lack of cordial appreciation or mutual forbearance 
besides this the legends that reflect aristotle unfavourably are traceable to 
the epicureans who were known as slanderers if such legends were circulated 
widely by patristic writers such as justin martyr and gregory nazianzen the 
reason lies in the exaggerated esteem aristotle was held in by the early 
christian heretics not in any well grounded historical tradition aristotle as 
philosopher and tutor after the death of plato three four seven bc aristotle 
was considered as the next head of the academy a position that was eventually 
awarded to plato s nephew aristotle then went with xenocrates to the court of 
hermias ruler of atarneus in asia minor and married his niece and adopted 
daughter pythia in three four four bc hermias was murdered in a rebellion and 
aristotle went with his family to mytilene it is also reported that he stopped 
on lesbos and briefly conducted biological research then one or two years later 
he was summoned to pella the macedonian capital by king philip ii of macedon to 
become the tutor of alexander the great who was then one three plutarch wrote 
that aristotle not only imparted to alexander a knowledge of ethics and 
politics but also of the most profound secrets of philosophy we have much proof 
that alexander profited by contact with the philosopher and that aristotle made 
prudent and beneficial use of his influence over the young prince although 
bertrand russell disputes this due to this influence alexander provided 
aristotle with ample means for the acquisition of books and the pursuit of his 
scientific investigation it is possible that aristotle also participated in the 
education of alexander s boyhood friends which may have included for example 
hephaestion and harpalus aristotle maintained a long correspondence with 
hephaestion eventually collected into a book unfortunately now lost according 
to sources such as plutarch and diogenes philip had aristotle s hometown of 
stageira burned during the three four zero s bc and aristotle successfully 
requested that alexander rebuild it during his tutorship of alexander aristotle 
was reportedly considered a second time for leadership of the academy his 
companion xenocrates was selected instead founder and master of the lyceum in 
about three three five bc alexander departed for his asiatic campaign and 
aristotle who had served as an informal adviser more or less since alexander 
ascended the macedonian throne returned to athens and opened his own school of 
philosophy he may as aulus gellius says have conducted a school of rhetoric 
during his former residence in athens but now following plato s example he gave 
regular instruction in philosophy in a gymnasium dedicated to apollo lyceios 
from which his school has come to be known as the lyceum it was also called the 
peripatetic school because aristotle preferred to discuss problems of 
philosophy with his pupils while walking up and down peripateo the shaded walks 
peripatoi around the gymnasium during the thirteen years three three five bc 
three two two bc which he spent as teacher of the lyceum aristotle composed 
most of his writings imitating plato he wrote dialogues in which his doctrines 
were expounded in somewhat popular language he also composed the several 
treatises which will be mentioned below on physics metaphysics and so forth in 
which the exposition is more didactic and the language more technical than in 
the dialogues these writings show to what good use he put the resources 
alexander had provided for him they show particularly how he succeeded in 
bringing together the works of his predecessors in greek philosophy and how he 
pursued either personally or through others his investigations in the realm of 
natural phenomena pliny claimed that alexander placed under aristotle s orders 
all the hunters fishermen and fowlers of the royal kingdom and all the 
overseers of the royal forests lakes ponds and cattle ranges and aristotle s 
works on zoology make this statement more believable aristotle was fully 
informed about the doctrines of his predecessors and strabo asserted that he 
was the first to accumulate a great library during the last years of aristotle 
s life the relations between him and alexander became very strained owing to 
the disgrace and punishment of callisthenes whom aristotle had recommended to 
alexander nevertheless aristotle continued to be regarded at athens as a friend 
of alexander and a representative of macedonia consequently when alexander s 
death became known in athens and the outbreak occurred which led to the lamian 
war aristotle shared in the general unpopularity of the macedonians the charge 
of impiety which had been brought against anaxagoras and socrates was now with 
even less reason brought against aristotle he left the city saying according to 
many ancient authorities that he would not give the athenians a chance to sin a 
third time against philosophy he took up residence at his country house at 
chalcis in euboea and there he died the following year three two two bc his 
death was due to a disease reportedly of the stomach from which he had long 
suffered the story that his death was due to hemlock poisoning as well as the 
legend that he threw himself into the sea because he could not explain the 
tides is without historical foundation very little is known about aristotle s 
personal appearance except from hostile sources the statues and busts of 
aristotle possibly from the first years of the peripatetic school represent him 
as sharp and keen of countenance and somewhat below the average height his 
character as revealed by his writings his will which is undoubtedly genuine 
fragments of his letters and the allusions of his unprejudiced contemporaries 
was that of a high minded kind hearted man devoted to his family and his 
friends kind to his slaves fair to his enemies and rivals grateful towards his 
benefactors when platonism ceased to dominate the world of christian 
speculation and the works of aristotle began to be studied without fear and 
prejudice the personality of aristotle appeared to the christian writers of the 
one three th century as it had to the unprejudiced pagan writers of his own day 
as calm majestic untroubled by passion and undimmed by any great moral defects 
the master of those who know aristotle s legacy also had a profound influence 
on islamic thought and philosophy during the middle ages the likes of avicenna 
farabi and yaqub ibn ishaq al kindi one were a few of the major proponents of 
the aristotelian school of thought during the golden age of islam methodology 
aristotle defines philosophy in terms of essence saying that philosophy is the 
science of the universal essence of that which is actual plato had defined it 
as the science of the idea meaning by idea what we should call the 
unconditional basis of phenomena both pupil and master regard philosophy as 
concerned with the universal aristotle however finds the universal in 
particular things and called it the essence of things while plato finds that 
the universal exists apart from particular things and is related to them as 
their prototype or exemplar for aristotle therefore philosophic method implies 
the ascent from the study of particular phenomena to the knowledge of essences 
while for plato philosophic method means the descent from a knowledge of 
universal ideas to a contemplation of particular imitations of those ideas in a 
certain sense aristotle s method is both inductive and deductive while plato s 
is essentially deductive in aristotle s terminology the term natural philosophy 
corresponds to the phenomena of the natural world which include motion light 
and the laws of physics many centuries later these subjects would become the 
basis of modern science as studied through the scientific method in modern 
times the term philosophy has come to be more narrowly understood as 
metaphysics distinct from empirical study of the natural world via the physical 
sciences in contrast in aristotle s time and use philosophy was taken to 
encompass all facets of intellectual inquiry in the larger sense of the word he 
makes philosophy coextensive with reasoning which he also called science note 
however that his use of the term science carries a different meaning than that 
which is covered by the scientific method all science dianoia is either 
practical poetical or theoretical by practical science he understands ethics 
and politics by poetical he means the study of poetry and the other fine arts 
while by theoretical philosophy he means physics mathematics and metaphysics 
the last philosophy in the stricter sense he defines as the knowledge of 
immaterial being and calls it first philosophy the theologic science or of 
being in the highest degree of abstraction if logic or as aristotle calls it 
analytic be regarded as a study preliminary to philosophy we have as divisions 
of aristotelian philosophy one logic two theoretical philosophy including 
metaphysics physics mathematics three practical philosophy and four poetical 
philosophy aristotle s epistemology logic history aristotle says that on the 
subject of reasoning he had nothing else on an earlier date to speak about 
boche ski one nine five one however plato reports that syntax was thought of 
before him by prodikos of keos who was concerned by the right use of words 
logic seems to have emerged from dialectics the earlier philosophers used 
concepts like reductio ad absurdum as a rule when discussing but never 
understood its logical implications even plato had difficulties with logic 
although he had the idea of constructing a system for deduction he was never 
able to construct one instead he relied on his dialectic which was a confusion 
between different sciences and methods boche ski one nine five one plato 
thought that deduction would simply follow from premises so he focused on 
having good premises so that the conclusion would follow later on plato 
realised that a method for obtaining the conclusion would be beneficial plato 
never obtained such a method but his best attempt was published in his book 
sophist where he introduced his division method rose one nine six eight 
analytics and the organon what we call today aristotelian logic aristotle 
himself would have labelled analytics the term logic he reserved to mean 
dialectics most of aristotle s work is probably not in its original form since 
it was most likely edited by students and later lecturers the logical works of 
aristotle were compiled into six books at about the time of christ categories 
on interpretation prior analytics posterior analytics topics on sophistical 
refutations the order of the books or the teachings from which they are 
composed is not certain but this list was derived from analysis of aristotle s 
writings there is one volume of aristotle s concerning logic not found in the 
organon namely the fourth book of metaphysics boche ski one nine five one modal 
logic aristotle is also the creator of syllogisms with modalities modal logic 
the word modal refers to the word modes explaining the fact that modal logic 
deals with the modes of truth aristotle introduced the qualification of 
necessary and possible premises he constructed a logic which helped in the 
evaluation of truth but which was very difficult to interpret rose one nine six 
eight science aristotle by francesco hayez aristotelian discussions about 
science had only been qualitative not quantitative by the modern definition of 
the term aristotelian philosophy was not science as this worldview did not 
attempt to probe how the world actually worked through experiment for example 
in his book the history of animals he claimed that human males have more teeth 
than females had he only made some observations he would have discovered that 
this claim is false rather based on what one s senses told one aristotelian 
philosophy then depended upon the assumption that man s mind could elucidate 
all the laws of the universe based on simple observation without 
experimentation through reason alone one of the reasons for this was that 
aristotle held that physics was about changing objects with a reality of their 
own whereas mathematics was about unchanging objects without a reality of their 
own in this philosophy he could not imagine that there was a relationship 
between them in contrast today s science assumes that thinking alone often 
leads people astray and therefore one must compare one s ideas to the actual 
world through experimentation only then can one see if one s ideas are based in 
reality this position is known as empiricism or the scientific method although 
aristotle initiated an important step in the history of scientific method by 
founding logic as a formal science he also left behind a trail of bankrupt 
cosmology that we may discern in selections of the metaphysics his cosmology 
would gain much acceptance up until the one five zero zero s where copernicus 
and galileo began to figure out that europe is not the center of the universe 
from the three rd century to the one five zero zero s the dominant view held 
that the earth was the center of the universe at this late date it is 
uncontroversial that the earth is not even the center of our own solar system 
in spite of aristotle s bogus account of the planets and sun he is a vital 
character in the history of metaphysics both in terms of the etymology of the 
word as well as a figure within metaphysics as a discipline dubbed the stuff 
next to the physics by andronicus of rhodes metaphysics became connected to the 
idea of beyond the physical by simplicius a commentator on aristotle andronicus 
had published aristotle s works sometime around four three two zero bc so 
initially the etymology of metaphysics was simply that which is next to the 
physics aristotle s metaphysics causality aristole is the first who saw that 
all causes of things are beginnings that we have scientific knowledge when we 
know the cause that to know a thing s existence is to know the reason for its 
existence setting the guidelines for all the subsequent causal theories by 
specifying the number nature principles elements varieties order and modes of 
causation aristotle s account of the causes of things is the most comprehensive 
theory up to now according to aristotle s theory all the causes fall into 
several senses the total number of which amounts to the ways the question why 
may be answered namely by reference to the matter or the substratum the essence 
the pattern the form or the structure to the primary moving change or the agent 
and its action and to the goal the plan the end or the good consequently the 
major kinds of causes come under the following divisions the material cause is 
that from which a thing comes into existence as from its parts constituents 
substratum or materials this reduces the explanation of causes to the parts 
factors elements constituents ingredients forming the whole system structure 
compound complex composite or combination the part whole causation the formal 
cause tells us what a thing is that any thing is determined by the definition 
form pattern essence whole synthesis or archetype it embraces the account of 
causes in terms of fundamental principles or general laws as the whole 
macrostructure is the cause of its parts the whole part causation the efficient 
cause is that from which the change or the ending of the change first starts it 
identifies what makes of what is made and what causes change of what is changed 
and so suggests all sorts of agents nonliving or living acting as the sources 
of change or movement or rest representing the current understanding of 
causality as the relation of cause and effect this covers the modern 
definitions of cause as either the agent or agency or particular events or 
states of affairs the final cause is that for the sake of which a thing exists 
or is done including both purposeful and instrumental actions and activities 
the final cause or telos is the purpose or end that something is supposed to 
serve or it is that from which and that to which the change is this also covers 
modern ideas of mental causation involving such psychological causes as 
volition need motivation or motives rational irrational ethical all that gives 
purpose to behavior additionally things can be causes of one another causing 
each other reciprocally as hard work causes fitness and vice versa although not 
in the same way or function the one is as the beginning of change the other as 
the goal thus aristotle first suggested a reciprocal or circular causality as a 
relation of mutual dependence or action or influence of cause and effect also 
aristotle indicated that the same thing can be the cause of contrary effects 
its presence and absent may result in different outcomes besides aristotle 
marked two modes of causation proper prior causation and accidental chance 
causation all causes proper and incidental can be spoken as potential or as 
actual particular or generic the same language refers to the effects of causes 
so that generic effects assigned to generic causes particular effects to 
particular causes operating causes to actual effects essentiallly causality 
does not suggest a temporal relation between the cause and the effect all 
further investigations of causality will be consisting in imposing the favorite 
hierarchies on the order causes like as final efficient material formal aquinas 
or in restricting all causality to the material and efficient causes or to the 
efficient causality deterministic or chance or just to regular sequences and 
correlations of natural phenomena the natural sciences describing how things 
happen instead of explaining the whys and wherefores chance and spontaneity 
spontaneity and chance are causes of effects chance as an incidental cause lies 
in the realm of accidental things it is from what is spontaneous but note that 
what is spontaneous does not come from chance for a better understanding of 
aristotle s conception of chance it might be better to think of coincidence 
something takes place by chance if a person sets out with the intent of having 
one thing take place but with the result of another thing not intended taking 
place for example a person seeks donations that person may find another person 
willing to donate a substantial sum however if the person seeking the donations 
met the person donating not for the purpose of collecting donations but for 
some other purpose aristotle would call the collecting of the donation by that 
particular donator a result of chance it must be unusual that something happens 
by chance in other words if something happens all or most of the time we cannot 
say that it is by chance however chance can only apply to human beings it is in 
the sphere of moral actions according to aristotle chance must involve choice 
and thus deliberation and only humans are capable of deliberation and choice 
what is not capable of action cannot do anything by chance physics two six the 
five elements fire which is hot and dry earth which is cold and dry air which 
is hot and wet water which is cold and wet aether which is the divine substance 
that makes up the heavens these four elements interchange i e fire air water 
earth etc while aether is on its own the sun keeps this cycle going god keeps 
the sun going and thus the sun is eternal aristotle s ethics although aristotle 
wrote several works on ethics the major one was the nicomachean ethics which is 
considered one of aristotle s greatest works it discusses virtues the ten books 
which comprise it are based on notes from his lectures at the lyceum and were 
either edited by or dedicated to aristotle s son nicomachus aristotle believed 
that ethical knowledge is not certain knowledge like metaphysics and 
epistemology but general knowledge also as it is a practical discipline rather 
than a theoretical one he thought that in order to become good one could not 
simply study what virtue is one must actually do virtuous deeds in order to do 
this aristotle had first to establish what was virtuous he began by determining 
that everything was done with some goal in mind and that goal is good the 
ultimate goal he called the highest good aristotle contested that happiness 
could not be found only in pleasure or only in fame and honor he finally finds 
happiness by ascertaining the specific function of man but what is this 
function that will bring happiness to determine this aristotle analyzed the 
soul and found it to have three parts the nutritive soul plants animals and 
humans the perceptive soul animals and humans and the rational soul humans only 
thus a human s function is to do what makes it human to be good at what sets it 
apart from everything else the ability to reason or nous a person that does 
this is the happiest because they are fulfilling their purpose or nature as 
found in the rational soul depending on how well they did this aristotle said 
people belonged to one of four categories the virtuous the continent the 
incontinent and the vicious aristotle believes that every ethical virtue is an 
intermediate condition between excess and deficiency this does not mean 
aristotle believed in moral relativism however he set certain emotions e g hate 
envy jealousy spite etc and certain actions e g adultery theft murder etc as 
always wrong regardless of the situation or the circumstances nicomachean 
ethics in nicomachean ethics aristotle focuses on the importance of continually 
behaving virtuously and developing virtue rather than committing specific good 
actions this can be contrasted with kantian ethics in which the primary focus 
is on individual action nicomachean ethics emphasizes the importance of context 
to ethical behaviour what might be right in one situation might be wrong in 
another aristotle believed that happiness is the end of life and that as long 
as a person is striving for goodness good deeds will result from that struggle 
making the person virtuous and therefore happy aristotle s critics plato left 
and aristotle right a detail of the school of athens a fresco by raphael 
aristotle gestures to the earth representing his belief in knowledge through 
empirical observation and experience whilst plato points up to the heavens 
showing his belief in the ultimate truth aristotle has been criticised on 
several grounds his analysis of procreation is frequently criticised on the 
grounds that it presupposes an active ensouling masculine element bringing life 
to an inert passive lumpen female element it is on these grounds that some 
feminist critics refer to aristotle as a misogynist at times the objections 
that aristotle raises against the arguments of his own teacher plato appear to 
rely on faulty interpretations of those arguments although aristotle advised 
against plato that knowledge of the world could only be obtained through 
experience he frequently failed to take his own advice aristotle conducted 
projects of careful empirical investigation but often drifted into abstract 
logical reasoning with the result that his work was littered with conclusions 
that were not supported by empirical evidence for example his assertion that 
objects of different mass fall at different speeds under gravity which was 
later refuted by john philoponus credit is often given to galileo even though 
philopinus lived centuries earlier in the middle ages roughly from the one two 
th century to the one five th century the philosophy of aristotle became firmly 
established dogma although aristotle himself was far from dogmatic in his 
approach to philosophical inquiry two aspects of his philosophy might have 
assisted its transformation into dogma his works were wide ranging and 
systematic so that they could give the impression that no significant matter 
had been left unsettled he was also much less inclined to employ the skeptical 
methods of his predecessors socrates and plato some academics have suggested 
that aristotle was unaware of much of the current science of his own time 
aristotle was called not a great philosopher but the philosopher by scholastic 
thinkers these thinkers blended aristotelian philosophy with christianity 
bringing the thought of ancient greece into the middle ages it required a 
repudiation of some aristotelian principles for the sciences and the arts to 
free themselves for the discovery of modern scientific laws and empirical 
methods the loss of his works though we know that aristotle wrote many elegant 
treatises cicero described his literary style as a river of gold the originals 
have been lost in time all that we have now are the literary notes for his 
pupils which are often difficult to read the nicomachean ethics is a good 
example it is now believed that we have about one fifth of his original works 
aristotle underestimated the importance of his written work for humanity he 
thus never published his books except from his dialogues the story of the 
original manuscripts of his treatises is described by strabo in his geography 
and plutarch in his parallel lives sulla the manuscripts were left from 
aristotle to theophrastus from theophrastus to neleus of scepsis from neleus to 
his heirs their descendants sold them to apellicon of teos when sulla occupied 
athens in eight six bc he carried off the library of appellicon to rome where 
they were first published in six zero bc from the grammarian tyrranion of 
amisus and then by philosopher andronicus of rhodes bibliography note bekker 
numbers are often used to uniquely identify passages of aristotle they are 
identified below where available major works the extant works of aristotle are 
broken down according to the five categories in the corpus aristotelicum not 
all of these works are considered genuine but differ with respect to their 
connection to aristotle his associates and his views some such as the athenaion 
politeia or the fragments of other politeia are regarded by most scholars as 
products of aristotle s school and compiled under his direction or supervision 
other works such on colours may have been products of aristotle s successors at 
the lyceum e g theophrastus and straton still others acquired aristotle s name 
through similarities in doctrine or content such as the de plantis possibly by 
nicolaus of damascus a final category omitted here includes medieval 
palmistries astrological and magical texts whose connection to aristotle is 
purely fanciful and self promotional those that are seriously disputed are 
marked with an asterisk logical writings organon collected works on logic one a 
categories or categoriae one six a on interpretation or de interpretatione two 
four a prior analytics or analytica priora seven one a posterior analytics or 
analytica posteriora one zero zero b topics or topica one six four a on 
sophistical refutations or de sophisticis elenchis physical and scientific 
writings one eight four a physics or physica two six eight a on the heavens or 
de caelo three one four a on generation and corruption or de generatione et 
corruptione three three eight a meteorology or meteorologica three nine one a 
on the cosmos or de mundo or on the universe four zero two a on the soul or de 
anima four three six a little physical treatises or parva naturalia on sense 
and the sensible or de sensu et sensibilibus on memory and reminiscence or de 
memoria et reminiscentia on sleep and sleeplessness or de somno et vigilia on 
dreams or de insomniis on prophesying by dreams or de divinatione per somnum on 
longevity and shortness of life or de longitudine et brevitate vitae on youth 
and old age on life and death or de juventute et senectute de vita et morte on 
breathing or de respiratione four eight one a on breath or de spiritu four 
eight six a history of animals or historia animalium or on the history of 
animals or description of animals six three nine a on the parts of animals or 
de partibus animalium six nine eight a on the gait of animals or de motu 
animalium or on the movement of animals seven zero four a on the progression of 
animals or de incessu animalium seven one five a on the generation of animals 
or de generatione animalium seven nine one a on colours or de coloribus eight 
zero zero a de audibilibus eight zero five a physiognomics or physiognomonica 
on plants or de plantis eight three zero a on marvellous things heard or 
mirabilibus auscultationibus or on things heard eight four seven a mechanical 
problems or mechanica eight five nine a problems or problemata nine six eight a 
on indivisible lines or de lineis insecabilibus nine seven three a situations 
and names of winds or ventorum situs nine seven four a on melissus xenophanes 
and gorgias or mxg the section on xenophanes starts at nine seven seven a one 
three the section on gorgias starts at nine seven nine a one one metaphysical 
writings nine eight zero a metaphysics or metaphysica ethical writings one zero 
nine four a nicomachean ethics or ethica nicomachea or the ethics one one eight 
one a great ethics or magna moralia one two one four a eudemian ethics or 
ethica eudemia one two four nine a virtues and vices or de virtutibus et vitiis 
libellus libellus de virtutibus one two five two a politics or politica one 
three four three a economics or oeconomica aesthetic writings one three five 
four a rhetoric or ars rhetorica or the art of rhetoric or treatise on rhetoric 
rhetoric to alexander or rhetorica ad alexandrum one four four seven a poetics 
or ars poetica a work outside the corpus aristotelicum the constitution of the 
athenians or athenaion politeia or the athenian constitution specific editions 
princeton university press the complete works of aristotle the revised oxford 
translation two volume set bollingen series vol lxxi no two edited by jonathan 
barnes isbn zero six nine one zero nine nine five zero two the most complete 
recent translation of aristotle s extant works oxford university press 
clarendon aristotle series scholarly edition harvard university press loeb 
classical library hardbound publishes in greek with english translations on 
facing pages oxford classical texts hardbound greek only named for aristotle 
aristoteles crater on the moon the aristotle university of thessaloniki 
aristotle s cockney legacy the name of aristotle like that of j arthur rank 
became a common expression in cockney rhyming slang see also aristotelian view 
of god aristotelian theory of gravity philia phronesis aristotle s theory of 
potentialiy and actuality references needless to say the secondary literature 
on aristotle is vast the following references are only a small selection a 
popular exposition for the general reader a detailed and scholarly work but 
very readable an classic overview by one of aristotle s most important english 
translators in print since one nine two three for the general reader external 
links a brief biography and e texts presented one chapter at a time the 
internet encyclopedia of philosophy aristotle two zero zero four an extensive 
collection of aristotle s philosophy and works including lesser known texts 
nicomachean ethics by aristotle aristotle and indian logic o connor j john the 
constitution of athens three two two bc deaths three eight four bc births 
ancient greek mathematicians ancient greek philosophers aristotelian 
philosophers aristotle empiricists greek logicians history of philosophy 
history of science meteorologists rhetoric rhetoricians an american in paris is 
also a one nine five one film musical starring gene kelly an american in paris 
is a symphonic composition by american composer george gershwin which debuted 
in one nine two eight inspired by gershwin s time in paris it is in the form of 
an extended tone poem evoking the sights and energy of the french capital in 
the one nine two zero s in addition to the standard instruments of the symphony 
orchestra the score features period automobile horns gershwin brought back some 
parisian taxi cab horns for the new york premiere of the composition an 
american in paris is second only to rhapsody in blue as a favorite of gershwin 
s classical compositions the score also features instruments rarely seen in the 
concert hall celesta and saxophones compositions by george gershwin symphonic 
poems the academy awards popularly known as the oscars are the most prominent 
film awards in the united states and arguably the world the awards are granted 
by the academy of motion picture arts and sciences a professional honorary 
organization which as of two zero zero three had a voting membership of five 
eight one six actors with a membership of one three one one make up the largest 
voting bloc the votes have been tabulated and certified by auditing firm 
pricewaterhousecoopers since close to the awards inception the next oscars will 
take place on sunday march five th two zero zero six oscar statuette the 
official name of the oscar statuette is the academy award of merit made of gold 
plated britannium on a black marble base it is one three five inches three four 
cm tall weighs eight five lbs three eight five kg and depicts a knight holding 
a crusader s sword standing on a reel of film the root of the name oscar is 
contested some believe it comes from academy librarian margaret herrick who saw 
it on a table and said it looks just like my uncle oscar others claim that 
bette davis named it after her first husband however it became the nickname 
stuck and is used almost as commonly as academy award even by the academy 
itself in fact the academy s domain name is oscars org and the official website 
for the academy awards is at oscar com awards night the major awards are given 
out at a ceremony most commonly in march following the relevant calendar year 
this is an elaborate extravaganza with the invited guests walking up the red 
carpet in the creations of the most prominent fashion designers of the day the 
ceremony and extravagant afterparties including the academy s governors ball 
are televised around the world the ceremony has consecutively aired on abc 
since one nine seven six nominations today according to rules two and three of 
the official academy awards rules a film has to open in the previous calendar 
year from midnight january one to midnight december three one in los angeles 
county california to qualify rule two states that a film must be feature length 
defined as four zero minutes to qualify for an award except for short subject 
awards of course it must also exist either on a three five mm or seven zero mm 
film print or on a two four fps or four eight fps progressive scan digital film 
print with a native resolution no lower than one two eight zero x one zero two 
four the members of the various branches nominate those in their respective 
fields actors are nominated by the actors branch etc while all members may 
submit nominees for best picture the winners are then determined by a second 
round of voting in which all members are now allowed to vote in all categories 
membership academy membership may be obtained by one of two ways a competitive 
nomination however the nominee must be invited to join or a member may submit a 
name seconded by at least two other members then voted upon by the board of 
governors the academy does not publicly disclose its membership although past 
press releases have announced the names of those who have been invited to join 
if a person not yet a member is nominated in more than one category in a single 
year he she must choose which branch to join when he she accepts membership 
awards although he never won an oscar for any of his movie performances the 
comedian bob hope received five honorary oscars for contributions to cinema and 
humanitarian work academy award of merit current awards best picture one nine 
two eight to present best leading actor one nine two eight to present best 
leading actress one nine two eight to present best supporting actor one nine 
three six to present best supporting actress one nine three six to present best 
animated feature two zero zero one to present best art direction one nine two 
eight to present also called interior or set decoration best cinematography one 
nine two eight to present best costume design one nine four eight to present 
best director one nine two eight to present best documentary feature best 
documentary short subject best film editing one nine three five to present best 
foreign language film one nine four seven to present best makeup one nine eight 
one to present best original score one nine three four to present best original 
song one nine three four to present best original musical one nine three four 
to present best animated short film one nine three one to present best live 
action short film best sound mixing one nine three zero to present best sound 
editing one nine six three to present best visual effects one nine three nine 
to present best adapted screenplay one nine two eight to present best original 
screenplay one nine four zero to present retired awards best assistant director 
one nine three three to one nine three seven best dance direction one nine 
three five to one nine three seven best engineering effects one nine two eight 
only best score adaptation or treatment best short film color one nine three 
six and one nine three seven best short film live action two reels one nine 
three six to one nine five six best short film novelty one nine three two to 
one nine three five best original story one nine two eight to one nine five six 
best title writing one nine two eight only best unique and artistic quality of 
production one nine two eight only in the first year of the awards the best 
director category was split into separate drama and comedy categories at times 
the best original score category has been split into separate drama and comedy 
musical categories today the best original score category is one category from 
the one nine three zero s through the one nine six zero s the cinematography 
art direction and costume design awards were split into separate categories for 
black and white and color films special awards these awards are voted on by 
special committees rather than by the academy membership as a whole current 
awards academy honorary award one nine two eight to present academy special 
achievement award academy award scientific or technical one nine three one to 
present at three levels the irving g thalberg memorial award one nine three 
eight to present the jean hersholt humanitarian award gordon e sawyer award 
retired awards academy juvenile award one nine three four to one nine six zero 
academy award statistics academy award statistics films receiving one zero or 
more nominations academy award statistics films receiving eight or more awards 
academy award statistics films receiving awards for best picture directing 
actor actress and writing academy award statistics films receiving three or 
more acting nominations academy award statistics actors receiving five or more 
nominations academy award statistics actors receiving two or more awards 
academy award statistics directors receiving three or more nominations see also 
list of academy awards ceremonies list of movies that have won eight or more 
academy awards list of academy award winning movies seven eight th academy 
awards two zero zero six references gail k piazza j two zero zero two the 
academy awards the complete history of oscar black dog leventhal publishers inc 
external links oscars org the academy awards database oscar com the academy 
awards at the internet movie database academy awards film awards animalia cover 
animalia is an illustrated children s book by graeme base it was published in 
one nine eight six animalia is an alphabet book and contains twenty six 
illustrations one for each letter of the alphabet each illustration features an 
animal from the animal kingdom a is for alligator b is for butterfly etc the 
illustrations contain dozens of small objects that the curious reader can try 
to identify base also published a coloring book version for children to do 
their own coloring external links a web site that contains a fairly 
comprehensive list of items hidden in animalia s illustrations animalia on 
amazon com https www graemebase com home cfm graeme base s official website 
children s books temps atomique international tai or international atomic time 
is a very accurate and stable time scale it is a weighted average of the time 
kept by about three zero zero atomic clocks including a large number of caesium 
atomic clocks in over five zero national laboratories worldwide it has been 
available since one nine five five and became the international standard on 
which utc is based on january one one nine seven two as decided by the one four 
th general conference on weights and measures cgpm the international bureau of 
weights and measures is in charge of the realization of tai the highest 
precision realization of tai times can only be determined retrospectively as 
the timescale is defined by periodic comparisons among its participating atomic 
clocks however these corrections are usually only needed for applications that 
require nanosecond scale accuracy most time service users use realtime 
estimates of tai provided by atomic clocks that have been previously referenced 
to the composite timescale gps is a commonly used realtime source of time 
traceable back to tai coordinated universal time utc is the basis for legal 
time throughout much of the world and always differs from tai by an integral 
number of seconds from one january two zero zero six utc was behind tai by 
three three seconds the difference is due to an initial ten second offset on 
one january one nine seven two when utc was established and leap seconds which 
have been periodically inserted into utc since the first on three zero june one 
nine seven two due to slight irregularities in earth s rate of rotation while 
tai is a continuous and stable timescale utc has intentional discontinuities to 
keep it from drifting more than zero nine second from ut one a timescale 
defined by the earth s rotation roughly speaking solar noon the time at which 
the sun is directly overhead would drift away from one two zero zero zero zero 
without leap second corrections ut one is computed by the international earth 
rotation and reference systems service iers tai was defined such that tai ut 
two on january one one nine five eight because utc is a discontinuous timescale 
it is not possible to compute the exact time interval elapsed between two utc 
timestamps without consulting a table that describes how many leap seconds 
occurred during that interval therefore many scientific applications that 
require precise measurement of long multi year intervals use tai instead tai is 
also commonly used by systems that can not handle leap seconds see also 
terrestrial time coordinated universal time universal time sidereal time time 
and frequency transfer clock synchronization network time protocol external 
links bureau international des poids et mesures iers website nist time and 
frequency faqs time scales altruism is considered a belief a practice a habit 
or an ethical doctrine many cultures and religious traditions judge altruism to 
be virtuous in english the idea was often described as golden rule of ethics in 
buddhism it is considered a fundamental property of human nature altruism can 
refer to being helpful to other people with little or no interest in being 
rewarded for one s efforts the colloquial definition this is distinct from 
merely helping others actions that benefit others with a net detrimental or 
neutral effect on the actor regardless of the actor s own psychology motivation 
or the cause of his or her actions this type of altruistic behavior is referred 
to in ecology as commensalism an ethical doctrine that holds that individuals 
have a moral obligation to help others if necessary to the exclusion of one s 
own interest or benefit one who holds such a doctrine is known as an altruist 
the concepts have a long history in philosophical and ethical thought and have 
more recently become a topic for psychologists sociologists evolutionary 
biologists and ethologists while ideas about altruism from one field can have 
an impact on the other fields the different methods and focuses of these fields 
lead to different perspectives on altruism altruism can be distinguished from a 
feeling of loyalty and duty altruism focuses on a moral obligation towards all 
humanity while duty focuses on a moral obligation towards a specific individual 
e g a king a specific organization e g a government or an abstract concept e g 
god country etc some individuals may feel both altruism and duty while others 
may not as opposed to altruism duty is much easier to enforce by an authority 
altruism in ethics main article altruism ethical doctrine the word altruism 
french altruisme from autrui other people derived from latin alter other was 
coined by auguste comte the french founder of positivism in order to describe 
the ethical doctrine he supported he believed that individuals had a moral 
obligation to serve the interest of others or the greater good of humanity 
comte says in his catechisme positiviste that the social point of view cannot 
tolerate the notion of rights for such notion rests on individualism we are 
born under a load of obligations of every kind to our predecessors to our 
successors to our contemporaries after our birth these obligations increase or 
accumulate for it is some time before we can return any service this to live 
for others the definitive formula of human morality gives a direct sanction 
exclusively to our instincts of benevolence the common source of happiness and 
duty man must serve humanity whose we are entirely as the name of the ethical 
doctrine is altruism doing what the ethical doctrine prescribes has also come 
to be referred to by the term altruism serving others through placing their 
interests above one s own however the idea that one has a moral obligation to 
serve others is much older than auguste comte for example many of the world s 
oldest and most widespread religions particularly buddhism and christianity 
advocate it in the new testament of the christian bible it is explained as 
follows jesus made answer and said a certain man was going down from jerusalem 
to jericho and he fell among robbers who both stripped him and beat him and 
departed leaving him half dead and by chance a certain priest was going down 
that way and when he saw him he passed by on the other side and in like manner 
a levite also when he came to the place and saw him passed by on the other side 
but a certain samaritan as he journeyed came where he was and when he saw him 
he was moved with compassion and came to him and bound up his wounds pouring on 
them oil and wine and he set him on his own beast and brought him to an inn and 
took care of him and on the morrow he took out two shillings and gave them to 
the host and said take care of him and whatsoever thou spendest more i when i 
come back again will repay thee which of these three thinkest thou proved 
neighbor unto him that fell among the robbers and he said he that showed mercy 
on him and jesus said unto him go and do thou likewise luke one zero three zero 
three seven philosophers who support egoism have argued that altruism is 
demeaning to the individual and that no moral obligation to help others 
actually exists nietzsche asserts that altruism is predicated on the assumption 
that others are more important than one s self and that such a position is 
degrading and demeaning he also claims that it was very uncommon for people in 
europe to consider the sacrifice of one s own interests for others as virtuous 
until after the advent of christianity ayn rand argued that altruism is the 
willful sacrifice of one s values and represents the reversal of morality 
because only a rationally selfish ethics allows one to pursue the values 
required for human life advocates of altruism as an ethical doctrine maintain 
that one ought to act or refrain from acting so that benefit or good is 
bestowed on other people if necessary to the exclusion of one s own interests 
note that refraining from murdering someone for example is not altruism since 
he is not receiving a benefit or being helped as he already has his life this 
would amount to the same thing as ignoring someone altruism in ethology and 
evolutionary biology in the science of ethology the study of behavior altruism 
refers to behavior by an individual that increases the fitness of another 
individual while decreasing the fitness of the actor this would appear to be 
counter intuitive if one presumes that natural selection acts on the individual 
natural selection however acts on the gene pool of the subjects not on each 
subject individually recent developments in game theory have provided some 
explanations for apparent altruism as have traditional evolutionary analyses 
among the proposed mechanisms are behavioral manipulation e g by certain 
parasites that can alter the behavior of the host see bounded rationality e g 
herbert simon conscience indirect reciprocity e g reputation kin selection 
including eusociality see also selfish gene memes by influencing behavior to 
favour their own spread e g religion reciprocal altruism mutual aid sexual 
selection strong reciprocity the study of altruism was the initial impetus 
behind george r price s development of the price equation which is a 
mathematical equation used to study genetic evolution an interesting example of 
altruism is found in the cellular slime moulds such as dictyostelium mucoroides 
these protists live as individual amoebae until starved at which point they 
aggregate and form a multicellular fruiting body in which some cells sacrifice 
themselves to promote the survival of other cells in the fruiting body social 
behavior and altruism share many similaraties to the interactions between the 
many parts cells genes of an organism but are distinguished by the ability of 
each individual to reproduce indefinitely without an absolute requirement for 
its neighbors altruism in psychology and sociology if one performs an act 
beneficial to others with a view to gaining some personal benefit then it is 
not an altruistically motivated act there are several different perspectives on 
how benefit or interest should be defined a material gain e g money a physical 
reward etc is clearly a form of benefit while others identify and include both 
material and immaterial gains affection respect happiness satisfaction etc as 
being philosophically identical benefits according to psychological egoism 
while people can exhibit altruistic behavior they cannot have altruistic 
motivations psychological egoists would say that while they might very well 
spend their lives benefitting others with no material benefit or a material net 
loss to themselves their most basic motive for doing so is always to further 
their own interests for example it would be alleged that the foundational 
motive behind a person acting this way is to advance their own psychological 
well being good feeling critics of this theory often reject it on the grounds 
that it is non falsifiable in other words it is designed in such a way as to be 
impossible to prove or disprove because immaterial gains such as a good feeling 
cannot be measured or proven to exist in all people performing altruistic acts 
psychological egoism has also been accused of using circular logic if a person 
willingly performs an act that means he derives personal enjoyment from it 
therefore people only perform acts that give them personal enjoyment this 
statement is circular because its conclusion is identical to its hypothesis it 
assumes that people only perform acts that give them personal enjoyment and 
concludes that people only perform acts that give them personal enjoyment in 
contrast to psychological egoism the empathy altruism hypothesis states that 
when an individual experiences empathy towards someone in need the individual 
will then be altruistically motivated to help that person that is the 
individual will be primarily concerned about that person s welfare not his or 
her own in common parlance altruism usually means helping another person 
without expecting material reward from that or other persons although it may 
well entail the internal benefit of a good feeling sense of satisfaction self 
esteem fulfillment of duty whether imposed by a religion or ideology or simply 
one s conscience or the like in this way one need not speculate on the motives 
of the altruist in question humans are not exclusively altruistic towards 
family members previous co operators or potential future allies but can be 
altruistic towards people they don t know and will never meet for example 
humans donate to international charities and volunteer their time to help 
society s less fortunate it strains plausibility to claim that these altruistic 
deeds are done in the hope of a return favor the game theory analysis of this 
just in case strategy where the principle would be always help everyone in case 
you need to pull in a favor in return is a decidedly non optimal strategy where 
the net expenditure of effort tit is far greater than the net profit when it 
occasionally pays off tat according to some it is difficult to believe that 
these behaviors are solely explained as indirect selfish rationality be it 
conscious or sub conscious mathematical formulations of kin selection along the 
lines of the prisoner s dilemma are helpful as far as they go but what a game 
theoretic explanation glosses over is the fact that altruistic behavior can be 
attributed to that apparently mysterious phenomenon the conscience one recent 
suggestion proposed by the philosopher daniel dennett was initially developed 
when considering the problem of so called free riders in the tragedy of the 
commons a larger scale version of the prisoner s dilemma in game theory terms a 
free rider is an agent who draws benefits from a co operative society without 
contributing in a one to one situation free riding can easily be discouraged by 
a tit for tat strategy but in a larger scale society where contributions and 
benefits are pooled and shared they can be incredibly difficult to shake off 
imagine an elementary society of co operative organisms co operative agents 
interact with each other each contributing resources and each drawing on the 
common good now imagine a rogue free rider an agent who draws a favor you 
scratch my back and later refuses to return it the problem is that free riding 
is always going to be beneficial to individuals at cost to society how can well 
behaved co operative agents avoid being cheated over many generations one 
obvious solution is for co operators to evolve the ability to spot potential 
free riders in advance and refuse to enter into reciprocal arrangements with 
them then the canonical free rider response is to evolve a more convincing 
disguise fooling co operators into co operating after all this can lead to an 
evolutionary arms races with ever more sophisticated disguises and ever more 
sophisticated detectors in this evolutionary arms race how best might one 
convince comrades that one really is a genuine co operator not a free rider in 
disguise one answer is by actually making oneself a genuine co operator by 
erecting psychological barriers to breaking promises and by advertising this 
fact to everyone else in other words a good solution is for organisms to evolve 
things that everyone knows will force them to be co operators and to make it 
obvious that they ve evolved these things so evolution will produce organisms 
who are sincerely moral and who wear their hearts on their sleeves in short 
evolution will give rise to the phenomenon of conscience this theory combined 
with ideas of kin selection and the one to one sharing of benefits may explain 
how a blind and fundamentally selfish process can produce a genuinely non 
cynical form of altruism that gives rise to the human conscience critics of 
such technical game theory analysis point out that it appears to forget that 
human beings are rational and emotional to presume an analysis of human 
behaviour without including human rationale or emotion is necessarily 
unrealistically narrow and treats human beings as if they are mere machines 
sometimes called homo economicus another objection is that often people donate 
anonymously so that it is impossible to determine if they really did the 
altruistic act beginning with an understanding that rational human beings 
benefit from living in a benign universe logically it follows that particular 
human beings may gain substantial emotional satisfaction from acts which they 
perceive to make the world a better place comparison of altruism and tit for 
tat studying the simple strategy tit for tat in the iterated prisoner s dilemma 
problem game theorists argue that tit for tat is much more successful in 
establishing stable cooperation among individuals than altruism defined as 
unconditional cooperation can ever be tit for tat starts with cooperation in 
the first step as altruism does and then just imitates the behaviour of the 
partner step by step if the partner cooperates then he rewards him with 
cooperation if he doesn t then he punishes him by not cooperating in the next 
step confronted with many strategies that try to exploit or abuse cooperation 
of others this simple strategy surprisingly proved to be the most successful 
see the evolution of cooperation it was even more successful than these abusing 
strategies while unconditional cooperativity altruism was one of the most 
unsuccessful strategies confronted with altruistic behaviour tit for tat is 
indistinguishable from pure altruism robert axelrod and richard dawkins also 
showed that altruism may be harmful to society by nourishing exploiters and 
abusers and making them more and more powerful until they can force everyone to 
cooperate unconditionally which is not the case for tit for tat see also 
comparison of entrepreneur and entredonneur in the context of biology the tit 
for tat strategy is also called reciprocal altruism altruism in politics there 
is currently a pov dispute as to the wording of the section shown below if one 
is an adherent to the ethical doctrine called altruism that people have an 
ethical obligation to help or further the welfare of others then one will 
support the kind of politics that one believes to be most effective in 
furthering the welfare of others regardless of the effect this may have on 
oneself since there is no general consensus on what kind of politics results in 
the greatest benefit for others different altruists may have very different 
political views with regard to their political convictions altruists may be 
divided in two broad groups those who believe altruism is a matter of personal 
choice and therefore selfishness can and should be tolerated and those who 
believe that altruism is a moral ideal which should be embraced if possible by 
all human beings a prominent example of the former branch of altruist political 
thought is lysander spooner who in natural law writes man no doubt owes many 
other moral duties to his fellow men such as to feed the hungry clothe the 
naked shelter the homeless care for the sick protect the defenceless assist the 
weak and enlighten the ignorant but these are simply moral duties of which each 
man must be his own judge in each particular case as to whether and how and how 
far he can or will perform them the latter branch of altruist political thought 
on the other hand argues that egoism should be actively discouraged and that 
altruists have a duty not only to help other people but to teach those people 
to help each other as well thus in politics these altruists almost always take 
a left wing stance ranging from moderate social democracy to socialism or even 
communism moderate altruists of this branch may argue for the creation of 
taxation funded government programs aimed at benefiting the needy for example 
transfer payments such as social welfare or public healthcare and public 
education less obvious things such as a law that motorists pull over to let 
emergency vehicles pass may also be justified by appealing to the altruism 
ethic finally radical altruists of this branch may take things further and 
advocate some form of collectivism or communalism on a somewhat related note 
altruism is often held even by non altruists to be the kind of ethic that 
should guide the actions of politicians and other people in positions of power 
such people are usually expected to set their own interests aside and serve the 
populace when they do not they may be criticized as defaulting on what is 
believed to be an ethical obligation to place the interests of others above 
their own politicians often speak of a moral obligation of individuals to help 
others for example george bush speaking to the united nations said we have a 
moral obligation to help others and a moral duty to make sure our actions are 
effective if one is an adherent to the ethical doctrine called altruism that 
people have an ethical obligation to help or further the welfare of others it 
can become a moral justification for forcing or advocating forcing individuals 
to help others in the realm of politics the altruist may employ an agent in the 
form of government to enforce this supposed moral obligation this is not to say 
that an ethical altruist will necessarily force this on anyone an altruist may 
allow others the freedom to behave in a manner they believe to be immoral or 
selfish in other words their ethical doctrine would not manifest itself 
politically with regard those who believe benevolence is a moral obligation 
altruists may be divided in two broad groups those who believe helping others 
is a moral obligation but should not be enforced on individuals and those who 
believe that since helping others is a moral obligation forcing individuals to 
help others if they are not willing on their own is justified a prominent 
example of the former branch of altruist political thought is lysander spooner 
who in natural law writes man no doubt owes many other moral duties to his 
fellow men such as to feed the hungry clothe the naked shelter the homeless 
care for the sick protect the defenceless assist the weak and enlighten the 
ignorant but these are simply moral duties of which each man must be his own 
judge in each particular case as to whether and how and how far he can or will 
perform them the latter branch of altruist political thought on the other hand 
argues that egoism should be actively discouraged and that individuals should 
be forced to help other people thus in politics these altruists almost always 
take a left wing stance ranging from moderate social democracy to socialism or 
even communism moderate altruists of this branch may argue for the creation of 
taxation funded government programs aimed at benefiting the needy for example 
transfer payments such as social welfare or public healthcare and public 
education finally radical altruists of this branch may take things to an 
extreme and advocate some form of state enforced collectivism communalism or 
communism this is in line with august comte s philosophy who coined the term 
altruism which argues against individual rights finally many believe that 
helping others or serving society is not a moral obligation at all but that 
altrusm is an arbitrary pronouncement not philosophically derivable these 
oppose all government enforced charity individualist anarchist pierre joseph 
proudhon in one eight four seven warns of enforcing charity that is why charity 
the prime virtue of the christian the legitimate hope of the socialist the 
object of all the efforts of the economist is a social vice the moment it is 
made a principle of constitution and a law that is why certain economists have 
been able to say that legal charity had caused more evil in society than 
proprietary usurpation the philosophy of poverty comte asserts that individual 
rights are not compatible with the supposed obligation to serve others some 
argue that the ethical doctrine if taken to its logical conclusion leads to 
tyranny altruism and religion all the major world religions promote altruism as 
a very important moral value christianity and buddhism place particular 
emphasis on altruistic morality as noted above but judaism islam and hinduism 
also promote altruistic behavior the good samaritan is a famous new testament 
parable appearing only in the gospel of luke one zero two five three seven the 
parable is told by jesus illustrating altruism see also altruism ethical 
doctrine altruism in animals psychology euphemism will law trust law tit for 
tat reciprocal altruism external links what is altruism altruists international 
biological altruism the altruistic personality and prosocial behavior institute 
at humboldt state university international institute for prosocial behavior and 
altruism research references batson c d one nine nine one the altruism question 
hillsdale nj erlbaum fehr e seven nine one august comte catechisme positiviste 
one eight five two or catechism of positivism tr r congreve london kegan paul 
one eight nine one oord thomas jay science of love philadelphia templeton 
foundation press two zero zero four nietzsche friedrich beyond good and evil 
pierre joseph proudhon the philosophy of poverty one eight four seven lysander 
spooner natural law ayn rand the virtue of selfishness matt ridley the origins 
of virtue oliner samuel p and pearl m towards a caring society ideas into 
action west port ct praeger one nine nine five the evolution of cooperation 
robert axelrod basic books isbn zero four six five zero two one two one two the 
selfish gene richard dawkins one nine nine zero second edition includes two 
chapters about the evolution of cooperation isbn zero one nine two eight six 
zero nine two five robert wright the moral animal vintage one nine nine five 
isbn zero six seven nine seven six three nine nine six ethics evolutionary 
biology philanthropy social philosophy social psychology sociology virtues 
motivation lee accepting the best foreign film award for crouching tiger hidden 
dragon at the seven three rd academy awards ang lee chinese pinyin l n born 
october two three one nine five four is an academy award winning film director 
from taiwan early life ang lee was born and raised in pingtung taiwan and 
educated in the united states where he found success as a hollywood director 
well known for his wuxia film crouching tiger hidden dragon two zero zero zero 
he completed his bachelor s degree in theater from the university of illinois 
and received his mfa from new york university s tisch school of the arts where 
in one nine eight four he made a thesis film called fine line he was a 
classmate of spike lee and worked on the crew of the latter lee s thesis film 
joe s bed stuy barbershop we cut heads career many of his films have focused on 
the interactions between modernity and tradition his films have also tended to 
have a light hearted comic tone which marks a break from the tragic historical 
realism which characterized taiwanese filmmaking after the end of the martial 
law period in one nine eight seven lee s films also tend to draw on deep 
secrets and internal torment that begin to come to the surface such as the gay 
themed films the wedding banquet one nine nine three brokeback mountain two 
zero zero five the martial arts epic crouching tiger hidden dragon two zero 
zero zero and the comic book adaptation hulk two zero zero three he received 
the dartmouth film award in two zero zero two along with meryl streep lee s 
film brokeback mountain two zero zero five won the best film award at the 
venice international film festival and was named two zero zero five s best film 
by the los angeles film critics it also won the golden globe award for best 
motion picture drama with lee winning the golden globe award for best director 
lee also won the best director award for the film at the two zero zero six 
british academy awards baftas in january two zero zero six brokeback scored a 
leading eight academy award nominations including lee for best director the 
film is considered to be the frontrunner for the march five two zero zero six 
ceremony he taught meryl streep s son and kai christophe wong initially 
scheduled for the lead in dark matter private life his wife jane is a 
microbiologist they have two children haan and mason he is a huge fan of the 
vancouver canucks of the national hockey league he kept his directing 
aspirations a secret because his culture did not encourage ambitions in a non 
practical career like film films director hulk two two zero zero seven 
brokeback mountain two zero zero five hulk two zero zero three the hire bmw 
short movies chosen two zero zero two crouching tiger hidden dragon chinese two 
zero zero zero ride with the devil one nine nine nine the ice storm one nine 
nine seven sense and sensibility one nine nine five eat drink man woman chinese 
one nine nine four the wedding banquet chinese one nine nine three pushing 
hands chinese one nine nine two fine line one nine eight four shades of the 
lake one nine eight two i love chinese food one nine eight one beat the artist 
one nine eight one the runner one nine eight zero one day of ma chuan chen 
chinese laziness in a saturday afternoon chinese see also writer siao yu 
chinese one nine nine five eat drink man woman chinese one nine nine four the 
wedding banquet chinese one nine nine three pushing hands chinese one nine nine 
two actor the wedding banquet chinese one nine nine three the hulk two zero 
zero three editing eat drink man woman chinese one nine nine four pushing hands 
chinese one nine nine two producer crouching tiger hidden dragon chinese two 
zero zero zero siao yu chinese one nine nine five external links ang lee on 
brokeback ang lee chinese one nine five four births living people american film 
directors hulk taiwanese americans taiwanese film directors best director 
golden globe best director oscar nominees ayn rand march six one nine eight two 
born alissa zinovievna rosenbaum was best known for her philosophy of 
objectivism and her novels we the living anthem the fountainhead and atlas 
shrugged her philosophy and her fiction both emphasize above all the concepts 
of individualism rational egoism rational self interest and capitalism which 
she believed should be implemented fully via laissez faire capitalism her 
politics has been described as minarchism and libertarianism though she never 
used the first term and detested the second her novels were based upon the 
projection of the randian hero a man whose ability and independence causes 
conflict with the masses but who perseveres nevertheless to achieve his values 
rand viewed this hero as the ideal and the express goal of her fiction was to 
showcase such heroes she believed that man must choose his values and actions 
by reason that the individual has a right to exist for his own sake neither 
sacrificing self to others nor others to self and that no one has the right to 
seek values from others by physical force or impose ideas on others by physical 
force biography early life rand was born in saint petersburg russia and was the 
eldest of three daughters of a jewish family her parents were agnostic and 
largely non observant from an early age she displayed a strong interest in 
literature and films she started writing screenplays and novels from the age of 
seven her mother taught her french and subscribed to a magazine featuring 
stories for boys where rand found her first childhood hero cyrus paltons an 
indian army officer in a rudyard kipling style story called the mysterious 
valley throughout her youth she read the novels of sir walter scott alexandre 
dumas and other romantic writers and expressed a passionate enthusiasm toward 
the romantic movement as a whole she discovered victor hugo at the age of 
thirteen and fell deeply in love with his novels later she cited him as her 
favorite novelist and the greatest novelist of world literature she studied 
philosophy and history at the university of petrograd her major literary 
discoveries in university were the works of edmond rostand friedrich schiller 
and fyodor dostoevsky she admired rostand for his richly romantic imagination 
and schiller for his grand heroic scale she admired dostoevsky for his sense of 
drama and his intense moral judgments but was deeply against his philosophy and 
his sense of life she continued to write short stories and screenplays and 
wrote sporadically in her diary which contained intensely anti soviet ideas she 
also encountered the philosophical ideas of nietzsche and loved his exaltation 
of the heroic and independent individual who embraced egoism and rejected 
altruism in thus spoke zarathustra though an early fan of nietzsche she 
eventually became critical seeing his philosophy as emphasizing emotion over 
reason nevertheless as allan gotthelf points out in book on ayn rand the 
influence was real she did still retain an admiration for some of his ideas and 
quoted nietzsche in the introduction to the two five th aniversary edition of 
the fountainhead the noble soul has reverence for itself her greatest influence 
by far is aristotle especially organon logic although leonard peikoff promoter 
of her ideas says she is the greatest philosopher who ever lived she herself 
considered aristotle the greatest philosopher ever and stated that he was the 
only philosopher who had influenced her this is probably because as she has 
stated she did not include her own work when analyzing the culture she then 
entered the state institute for cinema arts in one nine two four to study 
screenwriting in late one nine two five however she was granted a visa to visit 
american relatives she arrived in the united states in february one nine two 
six at the age of twenty one after a brief stay with her relatives in chicago 
she resolved never to return to the soviet union and set out for hollywood to 
become a screenwriter she then changed her name to ayn rand there is a story 
told that she named herself after the remington rand typewriter but she began 
using the name ayn rand before the typewriter was first sold she stated that 
her first name ayn was an adaptation of the name of a finnish writer this may 
have been the finnish estonian author aino kallas but variations of this name 
are common in finnish speaking regions major works initially rand struggled in 
hollywood and took odd jobs to pay her basic living expenses while working as 
an extra on cecil b demille s king of kings she intentionally bumped into an 
aspiring young actor frank o connor who caught her eye the two married in one 
nine two nine in one nine three one rand became a naturalized citizen of the 
united states her first literary success came with the sale of her screenplay 
red pawn in one nine three two to universal studios rand then wrote the play 
the night of january one six th in one nine three four which was highly 
successful and published two novels we the living one nine three six and anthem 
one nine three eight while we the living met with mixed reviews in the u s and 
positive reviews in the u k anthem received significiant and positive reviews 
only in england due in part to its odd publication history she was up against 
the red decade in america and anthem did not even find a publisher in the 
united states it was first published in england besides rand had still not 
perfected her literary style and these novels cannot be considered 
representative without rand s knowledge or permission we the living was made 
into a pair of films noi vivi and addio kira in one nine four two by scalara 
films rome they were nearly censored by the italian government under benito 
mussolini but they were permitted because the novel upon which they were based 
was anti soviet the films were successful and the public easily realized that 
they were as much against fascism as communism and the government banned them 
quickly thereafter these films were re edited into a new version which was 
approved by rand and re released as we the living in one nine eight six rand s 
first major professional success came with her best selling novel the 
fountainhead one nine four three which she wrote over a period of seven years 
the novel was rejected by twelve publishers who thought it was too intellectual 
and opposed to the mainstream of american thought it was finally accepted by 
the bobbs merrill company publishing house thanks mainly to a member of the 
editorial board archibald ogden who praised the book in the highest terms and 
finally prevailed eventually the fountainhead was a worldwide success bringing 
rand fame and financial security the theme of the fountainhead is individualism 
and collectivism in man s soul it features the lives of five main characters 
the hero howard roark is rand s ideal a noble soul par excellence an architect 
who is firmly and serenely devoted to his own ideals and believes that no man 
should copy the style of another in any field especially architecture all the 
other characters in the novel demand that he renounce his values but roark 
maintains his integrity unlike traditional heroes who launch into long and 
passionate monologues about their integrity and the unfairness of the world 
roark in contrast does it with a disdainful almost contemptuous taciturnity and 
laconicism rand s magnum opus atlas shrugged was published in one nine five 
seven becoming an international bestseller atlas shrugged is often seen as rand 
s most complete statement of the objectivist philosophy in any of her works of 
fiction in its appendix she offered this summary my philosophy in essence is 
the concept of man as a heroic being with his own happiness as the moral 
purpose of his life with productive achievement as his noblest activity and 
reason as his only absolute the theme of atlas shrugged is the role of man s 
mind in society rand upheld the industrialist as one of the most admirable 
members of any society and fiercely opposed the popular resentment accorded to 
industrialists this led her to envision a novel wherein the industrialists of 
america go on strike and retreat to a mountainous hideaway the american economy 
and its society in general slowly start to collapse the government responds by 
increasing the already stifling controls on industrial concerns the novel deals 
with issues as complex and divergent as sex music medicine politics and human 
ability along with nathaniel branden his wife barbara and others including alan 
greenspan and leonard peikoff jokingly designated the collective rand launched 
the objectivist movement to promote her philosophy the objectivist movement 
main article the objectivist movement in one nine five zero rand moved to new 
york city where in one nine five one she met the young psychology student 
nathaniel branden who had read her book the fountainhead at the age of one four 
branden then one nine enjoyed discussing rand s emerging objectivist philosophy 
with her together branden and some of his other friends formed a group that 
they dubbed the collective which included some participation by future federal 
reserve chairman alan greenspan after several years rand and branden s friendly 
relationship blossomed into a romantic affair despite the fact that both were 
married at the time their spouses were both convinced to accept this affair but 
it eventually led to the separation and then divorce of nathaniel branden from 
his wife although one of rand s most strident philosophical points was never to 
bow to societal pressure or norms ayn rand abandoned her own name see top of 
page as did branden born nathan blumenthal throughout the one nine six zero s 
and one nine seven zero s rand developed and promoted her objectivist 
philosophy through both her fiction and non fiction works and by giving talks 
at several east coast universities largely through the nathaniel branden 
institute the nbi which branden established to promote her philosophy after a 
convoluted series of separations rand abruptly ended her relationship with both 
nathaniel branden and his wife barbara branden in one nine six eight when she 
learned of nathaniel branden s affair with patrecia scott this later affair did 
not overlap chronologically with the earlier branden rand affair rand refused 
to have any further dealings with the nbi she then published a letter in the 
objectivist announcing her repudiation of branden for various reasons including 
dishonesty but did not mention their affair or her role in the schism the two 
never reconciled and branden remained a persona non grata in the objectivist 
movement one nine nine nine u s postage stamp honoring rand art by nick gaetano 
barbara branden presented an account of the breakup of the affair in her book 
the passion of ayn rand she describes the encounter between nathaniel and rand 
saying that rand slapped him numerous times and denounced him in these words if 
you have an ounce of morality left in you an ounce of psychological health you 
ll be impotent for the next twenty years and if you achieve any potency you ll 
know it s a sign of still worse moral degradation conflicts continued in the 
wake of the break with branden and the subsequent collapse of the nbi many of 
her closest collective friends began to part ways and during the late seven 
zero s her activities within the formal objectivist movement began to decline a 
situation which increased after the death of her husband in one nine seven nine 
one of her final projects was work on a television adaptation of atlas shrugged 
rand died of heart failure on march six one nine eight two in new york city 
years after having successfully battled cancer and was interred in the kensico 
cemetery valhalla new york grave marker of frank o connor and ayn rand 
philosophical influences rand rejected virtually all other philosophical 
schools she acknowledged a shared intellectual lineage with aristotle and john 
locke and more generally with the philosophies of the age of enlightenment and 
the age of reason she occasionally remarked with approval on specific 
philosophical positions of e g baruch spinoza and thomas aquinas she seems also 
to have respected the american rationalist brand blanshard however she regarded 
most philosophers as at best incompetent and at worst downright evil she 
singled out immanuel kant as the most influential of the latter sort 
nonetheless there are connections between rand s views and those of other 
philosophers she acknowledged that she had been influenced at an early age by 
the writings of friedrich nietzsche though she later repudiated his thought and 
reprinted her first novel we the living with some wording changes in one nine 
five nine her own thought grew out of critical interaction with it generally 
her political thought is in the tradition of classical liberalism she expressed 
qualified enthusiasm for the economic thought of ludwig von mises and henry 
hazlitt though not mentioned as an influence by her specifically parallels 
between her works and ralph waldo emerson s essay self reliance do exist later 
objectivists such as richard salsman have claimed that rand s economic theories 
are implicitly more supportive of the doctrines of jean baptiste say though 
rand herself was likely not acquainted with his work politics and house 
committee on un american activities testimony rand s political views were 
radically pro capitalist anti statist and anti communist her writings praised 
above all the human individual and the creative genius of which one is capable 
she exalted what she saw as the heroic american values of egoism and 
individualism rand also had a strong dislike for mysticism religion and 
compulsory charity all of which she believed helped foster a crippling culture 
of resentment towards individual human happiness and success rand detested many 
prominent liberal and conservative politicians of her time even including 
prominent anti communist crusaders like presidents harry s truman and ronald 
reagan and senators hubert h humphrey and joseph mccarthy although she argued 
that mccarthyism was a myth and that the accusation of mccarthyism was used as 
an ad hominem argument to discredit anti communists in one nine four seven 
during the red scare rand testified as a friendly witness before the house 
committee on un american activities see rand s testimony involved analysis of 
the one nine four three film song of russia while many believe that ayn rand 
disclosed the names of members of the communist party in the u s thus exposing 
them to blacklisting her testimony consisted entirely of comments regarding the 
disparity between her experiences in the soviet union and the fanciful 
portrayal of it in the film rand argued that the movie grossly misrepresented 
the socioeconomic conditions in the soviet union she told the committee that 
the film presented life in the ussr as being much better than it actually was 
apparently this one nine four three film was intentional wartime propaganda by 
u s patriots trying to put their soviet allies in world war ii under the best 
possible light after the huac hearings when ayn rand was asked about her 
feelings on the effectiveness of their investigations she described the process 
as futile legacy rand s funeral was attended by some of her prominent followers 
including alan greenspan a six foot floral arrangement in the shape of a dollar 
sign was placed near her casket in one nine eight five leonard peikoff a 
surviving member of the collective and ayn rand s designated heir established 
the ayn rand institute the center for the advancement of objectivism ari the 
institute has since registered the name ayn rand as a trademark despite rand s 
desire that her name never be used to promote the philosophy she developed rand 
expressed her wish to keep her name and the philosophy of objectivism separate 
to ensure the survival of her ideas another schism in the movement occurred in 
one nine eight nine when objectivist david kelley wrote a question of sanction 
in which he defended his choice to speak to non objectivist libertarian groups 
kelley stated that objectivism was not a closed system and should engage with 
other philosophies peikoff in an article for the intellectual activist called 
fact and value argued that objectivism is indeed a closed system and that truth 
and moral goodness are directly related peikoff expelled kelley from his 
movement whereupon kelley founded the institute for objectivist studies now 
known as the objectivist center rand and objectivism are less well known 
outside north america although there are pockets of interest in europe and 
australia and her novels are reported to be popular in india and to be gaining 
an increasingly wider audience in africa her work has had little effect on 
academic philosophy for her followers are with some notable exceptions drawn 
from the non academic world neil peart the drummer and lyricist with the 
canadian progressive rock band rush was influenced by rand philosophy during 
the early years of the band the most notable instances of this are the track 
anthem from the album fly by night one nine seven five and the title track from 
the album two one one two one nine seven six controversy rand s views are 
controversial religious and socially conservative thinkers have criticized her 
atheism many adherents and practitioners of continental philosophy criticize 
her celebration of rationality and self interest within the dominant 
philosophical movement in the english speaking world analytic philosophy rand s 
work has been mostly ignored no leading research university in this tradition 
considers rand or objectivism to be an important philosophical specialty or 
research area as is documented by brian leiter s report some academics however 
are trying to bring rand s work into the mainstream for instance the ayn rand 
society founded in one nine eight seven is affiliated with the american 
philosophical association in two zero zero six cambridge university press will 
publish a volume on rand s ethical theory written by ari affiliated scholar 
tara smith a notable exception to the general lack of attention paid to rand is 
the essay on the randian argument by harvard university philosopher robert 
nozick which appears in his collection socratic puzzles nozick s own 
libertarian political conclusions are similar to rand s but his essay 
criticizes her foundational argument in ethics which claims that one s own life 
is for each individual the only ultimate value because it makes all other 
values possible to make this argument sound nozick argues that rand still needs 
to explain why someone could not rationally prefer the state of eventually 
dying and having no values thus he argues her attempt to deduce the morality of 
selfishness is essentially an instance of assuming the conclusion or begging 
the question and that her solution to david hume s famous is ought problem is 
unsatisfactory nevertheless nozick respected rand as an author and noted that 
he found her books enjoyable and thought provoking rand has sometimes been 
viewed with suspicion for her practice of presenting her philosophy in fiction 
and non fiction books aimed at a general audience rather than publishing in 
peer reviewed journals rand s defenders note that she is part of a long 
tradition of authors who wrote philosophically rich fiction including dante 
john milton fyodor dostoevsky and albert camus and that other philosophers such 
as jean paul sartre presented their philosophies in both fictional and non 
fictional forms other critics argue that rand s idealistic philosophy and her 
romantic literary style are not applicable to the inhabited world in particular 
these critics claim that rand s novels are made up of unrealistic and one 
dimensional characters they criticize the portrayal of the objectivist heroes 
as incredibly intelligent unencumbered by doubt wealthy and free of flaws in 
contrast to the frequent portrayal of the antagonists as weak pathetic full of 
uncertainty and lacking in imagination and talent defenders of rand point out 
counterexamples to these criticisms neither eddie willers nor cherryl taggart 
both positive characters is especially gifted or intelligent but both are 
characters of dignity and respect leo kovalensky suffers enormously due to his 
inability to cope with the brutality and banality of communism andrei taganov 
dies after realizing his philosophical errors dominique francon is initially 
bitterly unhappy because she believes evil is powerful hank rearden is torn by 
inner emotional conflict brought on by a philosophical contradiction and dagny 
taggart thinks that she alone is capable of saving the world two of her main 
protagonists howard roark and john galt did not begin life wealthy though rand 
believed that under capitalism valuable contributions will routinely be 
rewarded by wealth she certainly did not think that wealth made a person 
virtuous in fact she presents many vicious bureaucrats and waspish elitists who 
use statism to accumulate money and power moreover hank rearden is exploited 
because of his social na vet as for the purportedly weak and pathetic villains 
rand s defenders point out that ellsworth toohey is represented as being a 
great strategist and communicator from an early age and dr robert stadler is a 
brilliant scientist rand herself replied to these literary criticisms and in 
advance of much of them with her essay the goal of my writing one nine six 
three there and in other essays collected in her book the romantic manifesto a 
philosophy of literature two nd rev ed one nine seven five rand makes it clear 
that her goal is to project her vision of an ideal man not man as he is but man 
as he might and ought to be rand s views on sex have also led to some 
controversy according to her for a woman qua woman the essence of femininity is 
hero worship the desire to look up to man one nine six eight some in the bdsm 
community see her work as relevant and supportive particularly the fountainhead 
another source of controversy is rand s view that homosexuality is immoral and 
disgusting as well as her support for the right of businesses to discriminate 
on the basis of homosexuality such as in their hiring practices specifically 
she stated that there is a psychological immorality at the root of 
homosexuality because it involves psychological flaws corruptions errors or 
unfortunate premises on the topic of non governmental discrimination rand s 
defenders argue that her support for its legality was motivated by holding 
property rights above civil or human rights as she did not believe that human 
rights were distinct from property rights so it did not constitute an 
endorsement of the morality of the prejudice itself in support of this they 
cite rand s opposition to some prejudices though not homophobia on moral 
grounds in essays like racism and global balkanization while still arguing for 
the right of individuals and businesses to act on such prejudice without 
government intervention bibliography fiction night of january one six th one 
nine three four we the living one nine three six anthem one nine three eight 
the fountainhead one nine four three atlas shrugged one nine five seven 
posthumous fiction three plays two zero zero five nonfiction for the new 
intellectual one nine six one the virtue of selfishness with nathaniel branden 
one nine six four capitalism the unknown ideal with nathaniel branden alan 
greenspan and robert hessen one nine six six introduction to objectivist 
epistemology one nine six seven the romantic manifesto one nine six nine the 
new left the anti industrial revolution one nine seven one philosophy who needs 
it one nine eight two posthumous nonfiction the early ayn rand edited and with 
commentary by leonard peikoff one nine eight four the voice of reason essays in 
objectivist thought edited by leonard peikoff additional essays by leonard 
peikoff and peter schwartz one nine eight nine introduction to objectivist 
epistemology second edition edited by harry binswanger additional material by 
leonard peikoff one nine nine zero letters of ayn rand edited by michael s 
berliner one nine nine five journals of ayn rand edited by david harriman one 
nine nine seven ayn rand s marginalia her critical comments on the writings of 
over twenty authors edited by robert mayhew one nine nine eight the ayn rand 
column written for the los angeles times edited by peter schwartz one nine nine 
eight russian writings on hollywood edited by michael s berliner one nine nine 
nine return of the primitive the anti industrial revolution expanded edition of 
the new left edited and with additional essays by peter schwartz one nine nine 
nine the art of fiction edited by tore boeckmann two zero zero zero the art of 
nonfiction edited by robert mayhew two zero zero one the objectivism research 
cd rom collection of most of rand s works in cd rom format two zero zero one 
ayn rand answers two zero zero five references in addition to rand s own works 
listed above the following references discuss rand s life and or literary work 
references that discuss her philosophy can be found in the bibliography of work 
on objectivism external links general information ayn rand faq frequently asked 
questions on ayn rand ayn rand entry from the internet encyclopedia of 
philosophy organizations promoting ayn rand s philosophy the ayn rand institute 
ari watch argues that some positions of the ayn rand institute differ from 
those of ayn rand the objectivist center the center for the advancement of 
capitalism articles as astonishing as elvis by jenny turner essay review of ayn 
rand by jeff britting ayn rand one zero zero tribute includes reference to a 
tribute album concerto of deliverance inspired by rand s words describing such 
music ayn rand has finally caught the attention of scholars by jeff sharlet faq 
what s really wrong with objectivism the heirs of ayn rand by scott mclemee an 
article published in lingua franca which covers the arc of her publishing 
career while alive and posthomous as well as the continuing scholarship rand 
featured on c span s american writers realvideo discussions on rand s writing 
articles critical of ayn rand criticisms of objectivism or ayn rand from of the 
critiques of libertarianism site criticisms of objectivism from the objectivism 
reference center site don t give to tsunami victims the message of the american 
right s philosopher queen a critical profile from the london independent the 
sociology of the ayn rand cult by murray rothbard written in one nine seven two 
this was the first piece of rand revisionism from the libertarian standpoint 
the unlikeliest cult in history by michael shermer rand s associates barbara 
branden s website nathaniel branden s website leonard peikoff s website online 
groups and blogs the atlasphere for admirers of rand s novels includes member 
directory dating service columns and news the ayn rand forum online forum for 
discussion of ayn rand and objectivism ayn rand livejournal community a large 
livejournal community for ayn rand dollars commentary from a pro capitalist 
perspective dr michael j hurd psychologist the daily dose of reason psychology 
life coaching and comments on cultural political topics from an objectivist 
perspective also the living resources newsletter and dr hurd s publications the 
forum for ayn rand fans harry binswanger list e mail based discussion group the 
journal of ayn rand studies contains abstracts of articles author bios links to 
several articles and submission guidelines objectivism net ayn rand on cd rom 
and links objectivismonline net contains forums blogs essays chat room and a 
wiki on objectivism objectivist blogs a list of rand influenced bloggers randex 
index of online media references to ayn rand and objectivism sense of life 
objectivists online columns and discussion by and for objectivists hosted by 
lindsay perigo tia daily daily news and commentary from the objectivist 
perspective by e mail imagery portrait of ayn rand rand s writing and speeches 
anthem the complete text of the novel which has fallen into the public domain 
atlas shrugged book outline the fountainhead book outline we the living book 
outline philosophy who needs it address to the graduating class of the united 
states military academy at west point new york march six one nine seven four 
rand s huac testimony transcript we the living video outline rand s papers at 
the library of congress one nine zero five births one nine eight two deaths two 
zero th century philosophers american literary critics american novelists 
american philosophers anti communism anti vietnam war aristotelian philosophers 
atheists atheist philosophers atheist thinkers and activists cat lovers 
epistemologists jewish american writers minarchists moral philosophers natives 
of saint petersburg naturalized citizens of the united states novelists 
objectivists philosophers political philosophers political writers pro choice 
celebrities women writers alain connes born april one one nine four seven is a 
french mathematician currently professor at the college de france paris france 
ihes bures sur yvette france and vanderbilt university nashville tennessee he 
is a specialist of von neumann algebras and succeeded in completing the 
classification of factors of these objects although his work in physics was not 
very convincing he tried to connect the planckian scales with what he called a 
two brane universe model which was largely rejected by string theorists so far 
the remarkable links between this subject the tools he and others devised to 
tackle the problem and other subjects in theoretical physics particle physics 
and differential geometry made him emphasize noncommutative geometry which is 
also the title of his major book to date he was awarded the fields medal in one 
nine eight two the crafoord prize in two zero zero one and the gold medal of 
the cnrs in two zero zero four see also cyclic homology factor functional 
analysis higgs boson c algebra m theory groupoid jean louis loday external 
links alain connes official web site one nine four seven births living people 
french mathematicians alumni of the cole normale sup rieure members and 
associates of the us national academy of sciences allan dwan april three one 
eight eight five december two one one nine eight one was a pioneering canadian 
born american motion picture director producer and screenwriter born joseph 
aloysius dwan in toronto ontario canada his family moved to the united states 
when he was eleven years of age at university he trained as an engineer and 
began working for a lighting company in chicago illinois however he had a 
strong interest in the fledgling motion picture industry and when essanay 
studios offered him the opportunity to become a scriptwriter he took the job at 
that time some of the east coast movie makers began to spend winters in 
california where the climate allowed them to continue productions requiring 
warm weather soon a number of movie companies worked there year round and in 
one nine one one dwan began working part time in hollywood while still in new 
york in one nine one seven he was the founding president of the east coast 
chapter of the motion picture directors association allan dwan became a true 
innovator in the motion picture industry after making a series of westerns and 
comedies he directed fellow canadian mary pickford in several very successful 
movies as well as her husband douglas fairbanks notably in the acclaimed one 
nine two two robin hood following the introduction of the talkies in one nine 
three seven he directed child star shirley temple in heidi and rebecca of 
sunnybrook farm the following year over his long and successful career spanning 
over fifty years he directed over four zero zero motion pictures many of them 
highly acclaimed such as the one nine four nine box office smash the sands of 
iwo jima his last movie was in one nine six one dwan is one of the directors 
who spanned the silent to sound era most of the silent movies he directed are 
lost due to poor preservation little historical writing has been devoted to 
dwan but some believe that he will be the last discovered great director from 
the classic hollywood era he died in los angeles at the age of ninety six and 
is interred in the san fernando mission cemetery mission hills california allan 
dwan has a star on the hollywood walk of fame at six two six three hollywood 
boulevard in hollywood selected films as director manhattan madness one nine 
one six fairbanks fine arts one nine one six fairbanks fragments one nine one 
six one nine one eight also screenwriter robin hood one nine two two the iron 
mask one nine two nine heidi one nine three seven rebecca of sunnybrook farm 
the little colonel one nine three eight rebecca of sunnybrook farm one nine 
three eight the three musketeers one nine three nine the gorilla one nine three 
nine young people one nine four zero look who s laughing one nine four one also 
producer friendly enemies one nine four two around the world one nine four 
three also producer up in mabel s room one nine four four abroad with two yanks 
one nine four four getting gertie s garter one nine four five also screenwriter 
brewster s millions one nine four five driftwood one nine four seven calendar 
girl one nine four seven northwest outpost one nine four seven also associate 
producer sands of iwo jima one nine four nine montana belle one nine five two 
silver lode one nine five four passion one nine five four cattle queen of 
montana one nine five four tennessee s partner one nine five five pearl of the 
south pacific one nine five five escape to burma one nine five five slightly 
scarlet one nine five six the restless breed one nine five seven enchanted 
island one nine five eight see also canadian pioneers in early hollywood 
external links one eight eight five births one nine eight one deaths roman 
catholics american film directors american film producers american 
screenwriters hollywood walk of fame ontario writers torontonians in the 
economy of algeria the hydrocarbons sector is the backbone accounting for 
roughly five two of budget revenues two five of gdp and over nine five of 
export earnings algeria has the fifth largest reserves of natural gas in the 
world and is the second largest gas exporter it ranks fourteenth for oil 
reserves algiers efforts to reform one of the most centrally planned economies 
in the arab world stalled in one nine nine two as the country became embroiled 
in political turmoil burdened with a heavy foreign debt algiers concluded a one 
year standby arrangement with the international monetary fund in april one nine 
nine four and the following year signed onto a three year extended fund 
facility which ended three zero april one nine nine eight some progress on 
economic reform paris club debt reschedulings in one nine nine five and one 
nine nine six and oil and gas sector expansion contributed to a recovery in 
growth since one nine nine five reducing inflation to approximately one and 
narrowing the budget deficit algeria s economy has grown at about four annually 
since one nine nine nine the country s foreign debt has fallen from a high of 
two eight billion in one nine nine nine to its current level of two four 
billion the spike in oil prices in one nine nine nine two zero zero zero and 
the government s tight fiscal policy as well as a large increase in the trade 
surplus and the near tripling of foreign exchange reserves has helped the 
country s finances however an ongoing drought the after effects of the november 
one zero two zero zero one floods and an uncertain oil market make prospects 
for two zero zero two zero three more problematic the government pledges to 
continue its efforts to diversify the economy by attracting foreign and 
domestic investment outside the energy sector however it has thus far had 
little success in reducing high unemployment officially estimated at three zero 
and improving living standards president bouteflika has announced sweeping 
economic reforms which if implemented will significantly restructure the 
economy still the economy remains heavily dependent on volatile oil and gas 
revenues the government has continued efforts to diversify the economy by 
attracting foreign and domestic investment outside the energy sector but has 
had little success in reducing high unemployment and improving living standards 
other priority areas include banking reform improving the investment 
environment and reducing government bureaucracy the government has announced 
plans to sell off state enterprises sales of a national cement factory and 
steel plant have been completed and other industries are up for offer in two 
zero zero one algeria signed an association agreement with the european union 
it has started accession negotiations for entry into the world trade 
organization agriculture since roman times algeria has been noted for the 
fertility of its soil about a quarter of the inhabitants are engaged in 
agricultural pursuits more than seven five zero zero zero zero zero acres three 
zero zero zero zero km are devoted to the cultivation of cereal grains the tell 
is the grain growing land during the time of french rule its productivity was 
increased substantially by the sinking of artesian wells in districts which 
only required water to make them fertile of the crops raised wheat barley and 
oats are the principal cereals a great variety of vegetables and of fruits 
especially citrus products is exported a considerable amount of cotton was 
grown at the time of the united states civil war but the industry declined 
afterwards in the early years of the two zero th century efforts to extend the 
cultivation of the plant were renewed a small amount of cotton is also grown in 
the southern oases large quantities of crin vegetal vegetable horse hair an 
excellent fibre are made from the leaves of the dwarf palm the olive both for 
its fruit and petroleum and tobacco are cultivated with great success algeria 
also exports figs dates esparto grass and cork wine production throughout 
algeria the soil favours the growth of vines the country in the words of an 
expert sent to report on the subject by the french government can produce an 
infinite variety of wines suitable to every constitution and to every caprice 
of taste the growing of vines was undertaken early by the colonists but it was 
not until vineyards in france were attacked by phylloxera that the export of 
wine from algeria became significant in one eight eight three despite 
precautionary measures algerian vineyards were also attacked but in the 
meantime the quality of their wines had been proved in one eight five zero less 
than two zero zero zero acres eight km were devoted to the grape but in one 
eight seven eight this had increased to over four two zero zero zero acres one 
seven zero km which yielded seven four three six zero zero zero gallons two 
eight zero zero zero m of wine despite bad seasons and ravages of insects 
cultivation extended and in one eight nine five the vineyards covered three 
zero zero zero zero zero acres one two zero zero km the produce being eight 
eight zero zero zero zero zero zero gallons three three three zero zero zero m 
the area of cultivation in one nine zero five exceeded four zero zero zero zero 
zero acres one six zero zero km and in that year the amount of wine produced 
was one five seven zero zero zero zero zero zero gallons five nine four zero 
zero zero m by that time the limits of profitable production had been reached 
in many parts of the country practically the only foreign market for algerian 
wine is france which in one nine zero five imported about one one zero zero 
zero zero zero zero zero gallons four one six zero zero zero m fishing fishing 
is a flourishing but minor industry fish caught are principally sardines bonito 
smelt and sprats fresh fish are exported to france dried and preserved fish to 
spain and italy coral fisheries are found along the coast from bona to tunis 
minerals algeria is rich in minerals the country has many iron lead and zinc 
copper calamine antimony and mercury mines the most productive are those of 
iron and zinc lignite is found in algiers immense phosphate beds were 
discovered near tebessa in one eight nine one yielding three one three five 
zero zero tons in one nine zero five phosphate beds are also worked near setif 
guelma and ain beida there are more than three zero zero quarries which produce 
amongst other stones onyx and beautiful white and red marbles algerian onyx 
from ain tekbalet was used by the romans and many ancient quarries have been 
found near kleber some being certainly those from which the long lost numidian 
marbles were taken salt is collected on the margins of the chotts foreign trade 
under french administration the commerce of algeria developed greatly the total 
imports and exports at the time of the french occupation one eight three zero 
did not exceed one seven five zero zero zero in one eight five zero the figures 
had reached five zero zero zero zero zero zero in one eight six eight one two 
zero zero zero zero zero zero in one eight eight zero one seven zero zero zero 
zero zero zero and in one eight nine zero two zero zero zero zero zero zero 
zero from this point progress was slower and the figures varied considerably 
year by year in one nine zero five the total value of the foreign trade was two 
four five zero zero zero zero zero about five sixths of the trade is with or 
via france into which country several algerian goods have been admitted duty 
free since one eight five one and all since one eight six seven french goods 
except sugar have been admitted into algeria without payment of duty since one 
eight three five after the increase in one eight nine two of the french minimum 
tariff which applied to algeria also foreign trade greatly diminished by far 
algeria s most significant exports financially are petroleum and natural gas 
the reserves are mostly in the eastern sahara the algerian government curbed 
the exports in the one nine eight zero s to slow depletion exports increased 
again somewhat in the one nine nine zero s other significant exports are sheep 
oxen and horses animal products such as wool and skins wine cereals rye barley 
oats vegetables fruits chiefly figs and grapes for the table and seeds esparto 
grass oils and vegetable extracts chiefly olive oil iron ore zinc natural 
phosphates timber cork crin vegetal and tobacco the import of wool exceeds the 
export sugar coffee machinery metal work of all kinds clothing and pottery are 
largely imported of these by far the greater part comes from france the british 
imports consist chiefly of coal cotton fabrics and machinery exports algeria 
trades most extensively with france and italy in terms of both imports and 
exports but also trades with the united states and spain statistics reference 
cia world factbook see also algeria organization of the petroleum exporting 
countries economies by country economy of algeria african union member 
economies the people s democratic republic of algeria arabic or algeria arabic 
is a presidential state in north africa and the second largest country on the 
african continent sudan being the largest it is bordered by tunisia in the 
northeast libya in the east niger in the southeast mali and mauritania in the 
southwest and morocco as well as a few kilometers of its annexed territory 
western sahara in the west constitutionally it is defined as an islamic arab 
and amazigh berber country the name algeria is derived from the name of the 
city of algiers from the arabic word al jaz ir which translates as the islands 
referring to the four islands which lay off that city s coast until becoming 
part of the mainland in one five two five history algeria has been inhabited by 
berbers or amazigh since at least one zero zero zero zero bc from one zero zero 
zero bc on the carthaginians became an influence on them establishing 
settlements along the coast berber kingdoms began to emerge most notably 
numidia and seized the opportunity offered by the punic wars to become 
independent of carthage only to be taken over soon after by the roman republic 
in two zero zero bc as the western roman empire collapsed the berbers became 
independent again in much of the area while the vandals took over parts until 
later expelled by the generals of the byzantine emperor justinian i the 
byzantine empire then retained a precarious grip on the east of the country 
until the coming of the arabs in the eight th century roman arch of trajan at 
thamugadi timgad algeria after some decades of fierce resistance under leaders 
such as kusayla and kahina the berbers adopted islam en masse but almost 
immediately expelled the caliphate from algeria establishing an ibadi state 
under the rustamids having converted the kutama of kabylie to its cause the 
shia fatimids overthrew the rustamids and conquered egypt they left algeria and 
tunisia to their zirid vassals when the latter rebelled and adopted sunnism 
they sent in a populous arab tribe the banu hilal to weaken them thus 
incidentally initiating the arabization of the countryside the almoravids and 
almohads berber dynasties from the west founded by religious reformers brought 
a period of relative peace and development however with the almohads collapse 
algeria became a battleground for their three successor states the algerian 
zayyanids tunisian hafsids and moroccan merinids in the fifteenth and sixteenth 
centuries spain started attacking and taking over many coastal cities prompting 
some to seek help from the ottoman empire algeria was brought into the ottoman 
empire by khair ad din and his brother aruj who established algeria s modern 
boundaries in the north and made its coast a base for the corsairs their 
privateering peaked in algiers in the one six zero zero s piracy on american 
vessels in the mediterranean resulted in the first and second barbary war with 
the united states on the pretext of a slight to their consul the french invaded 
algiers in one eight three zero however intense resistance from such 
personalities as emir abdelkader ahmed bey and fatma n soumer made for a slow 
conquest of algeria not technically completed until the early one nine zero 
zero s when the last tuareg were conquered constantine algeria one eight four 
zero meanwhile however the french suppressed slavery and made algeria an 
integral part of france a status that would end only with the collapse of the 
fourth republic tens of thousands of settlers from france italy spain and malta 
moved in to farm the algerian coastal plain and occupy the most prized parts of 
algeria s cities benefiting from the french government s confiscation of 
communally held land people of european descent in algeria the so called pieds 
noirs as well as the native algerian jews were full french citizens starting 
from the end of the one nine th century by contrast the vast majority of muslim 
algerians even veterans of the french army remained outside of french law 
possessing neither french citizenship nor the right to vote algeria s social 
fabric was stretched to breaking point during this period literacy dropped 
massively while land confiscation uprooted much of the population in one nine 
five four the national liberation front fln launched the guerrilla algerian war 
of independence after nearly a decade of urban and rural warfare they succeeded 
in pushing france out in one nine six two most of the one zero two five zero 
zero zero pieds noirs as well as nine one zero zero zero harkis pro french 
muslim algerians serving in the french army together forming about one zero of 
the population of algeria in one nine six two fled algeria for france in just a 
few months in the middle of that year the battle of algiers is a movie about 
the algerian war of independence algeria s first president the fln leader ahmed 
ben bella was overthrown by his former ally and defense minister houari boum di 
nne in one nine six five under ben bella the government had already become 
increasingly socialist and dictatorial and this trend continued throughout 
boumedienne s government however boumedienne relied much more heavily on the 
army and reduced the sole legal party to a merely symbolic role agriculture was 
collectivised and a massive industrialization drive launched oil extraction 
facilities were nationalized and this increased the state s wealth especially 
after the one nine seven three oil crisis but the algerian economy became 
increasingly dependent on oil bringing hardship when the price collapsed in the 
one nine eight zero s in foreign policy algeria was a member and leader of the 
non aligned nations a dispute with morocco over the western sahara nearly led 
to war dissent was rarely tolerated and the state s control over the media and 
the outlawing of political parties other than the fln was cemented in the 
repressive constitution of one nine seven six boum dienne died in one nine 
seven eight but the rule of his successor chadli bendjedid was little more open 
the state took on a strongly bureaucratic character and corruption was 
widespread the modernization drive brought considerable demographic changes to 
algeria village traditions underwent significant change as urbanization 
increased new industries emerged agriculture was substantially reduced and 
education a rarity in colonial times was extended nationwide raising the 
literacy rate from less than one zero to over six zero improvements in 
healthcare led to a dramatic increase in the birthrate seven eight children per 
mother which had two consequences a very youthful population and a housing 
crisis the new generation struggled to relate to the cultural obsession with 
the war years and two conflicting protest movements developed left wingers 
including berber identity movements and islamic int gristes both protested 
against one party rule but also clashed with each other in universities and on 
the streets during the one nine eight zero s mass protests from both camps in 
autumn one nine eight eight forced benjedid to concede the end of one party 
rule and elections were announced for one nine nine one in december one nine 
nine one the islamic salvation front won the first round of the country s first 
multiparty elections the military then canceled the second round forced then 
president bendjedid to resign and banned the islamic salvation front the 
ensuing conflict engulfed algeria in the violent algerian civil war more than 
one zero zero zero zero zero people were killed often in unprovoked massacres 
of civilians the question of who was responsible for these massacres remains 
controversial among academic observers many were claimed by the armed islamic 
group after one nine nine eight the war waned and by two zero zero two the main 
guerrilla groups had either been destroyed or surrendered taking advantage of 
an amnesty program though sporadic fighting continued in some areas elections 
resumed in one nine nine five and in one nine nine nine after a series of short 
term leaders representing the military abdelaziz bouteflika the current 
president was elected the issue of berber language and identity increased in 
significance particularly after the extensive kabyle protests of two zero zero 
one and the near total boycott of local elections in kabylie the government 
responded with concessions including naming of tamazight berber as a national 
language and teaching it in schools politics the head of state is the president 
of the republic who is elected to a five year term renewable once algeria has 
universal suffrage the president is the head of the council of ministers and of 
the high security council he appoints the prime minister who is also the head 
of government the prime minister appoints the council of ministers the algerian 
parliament is bicameral consisting of a lower chamber the national people s 
assembly apn with three eight zero members and an upper chamber the council of 
nation with one four four members the apn is elected every five years 
throughout the one nine six zero s algeria supported many independence 
movements in sub saharan africa and was a leader in the non aligned movement 
while it shares much of its history and cultural heritage with neighbouring 
morocco the two countries have had somewhat hostile relations with each other 
since algeria s independence this is due to two reasons morocco s claim to 
portions of western algeria which led to the sand war in one nine six three and 
algeria s support for the polisario an armed group of sahrawi refugees seeking 
independence for the moroccan ruled western sahara which it hosts within its 
borders in the city of tindouf tensions between algeria and morocco as well as 
issues relating to the algerian civil war have put great obstacles in the way 
of tightening the maghreb arab union nominally established in one nine eight 
nine but with little practical weight with its coastal neighbors provinces 
algeria is divided into four eight wilayas provinces geography map of algeria 
with cities the hoggar mountains most of the coastal area is hilly sometimes 
even mountainous and there are few good harbours the area just south of the 
coast known as the tell is fertile further south is the atlas mountain range 
and the sahara desert algiers oran and constantine are the main cities algeria 
s climate is arid and hot although the coastal climate is mild and the winters 
in the mountainous areas can be severe algeria is prone to sirocco a hot dust 
and sand laden wind especially common in summer see also extreme points of 
algeria economy algerian coins the fossil fuels energy sector is the backbone 
of the economy accounting for roughly six zero of budget revenues three zero of 
gdp and over nine five of export earnings algeria has the fifth largest 
reserves of natural gas in the world and is the second largest gas exporter it 
ranks one four th in petroleum reserves algeria s financial and economic 
indicators improved during the mid one nine nine zero s in part because of 
policy reforms supported by the imf and debt rescheduling from the paris club 
algeria s finances in two zero zero zero and two zero zero one benefited from 
an increase in oil prices and the government s tight fiscal policy leading to a 
large increase in the trade surplus record highs in foreign exchange reserves 
and reduction in foreign debt the government s continued efforts to diversify 
the economy by attracting foreign and domestic investment outside the energy 
sector has had little success in reducing high unemployment and improving 
living standards in two zero zero one the government signed an association 
treaty with the european union that will eventually lower tariffs and increase 
trade demographics algiers coast about nine zero of algerians live in the 
northern coastal area the minority who inhabit the sahara desert are mainly 
concentrated in oases although some one five million remain nomadic or partly 
nomadic ninety nine percent of the population is classified ethnically as arab 
berber and religiously as muslim other religions are restricted to extremely 
small groups mainly of foreigners europeans account for less than one most 
algerians are arab by language and identity and of mixed berber arab ancestry 
the berbers inhabited algeria before the arrival of arab tribes during the 
expansion of islam in the seven th century the issue of ethnicity and language 
is sensitive after many years of government marginalization of berber or 
amazigh as some prefer culture today the arab berber issue is often a case of 
self identification or identification through language and culture rather than 
a racial or ethnic distinction the two zero or so of the population who self 
identify as berbers and primarily speak berber languages such as tamazight are 
divided into several ethnic groups notably kabyle the largest in the 
mountainous north central area chaoui in the eastern atlas mountains mozabites 
in the m zab valley and tuareg in the far south language the official language 
is arabic spoken natively in dialectal form darja by some eight zero of the 
population the other two zero or so speak berber tamazight officially a 
national language french is the most widely studied foreign language distantly 
followed by english but is very rare as a native language since independence 
the government has pursued a policy of linguistic arabization of education and 
bureaucracy with some success although many university courses continue to be 
taught in french culture mosque in algiers modern algerian literature split 
between arabic and french has been strongly influenced by the country s recent 
history famous novelists of the two zero th century include mohammed dib and 
kateb yacine while assia djebar is widely translated important novelists of the 
one nine eight zero s included rachid mimouni later vice president of amnesty 
international and tahar djaout murdered by an islamist group in one nine nine 
three for his secularist views as early as roman times apuleius born in 
mdaourouch was native to what would become algeria in philosophy and the 
humanities malek bennabi and frantz fanon are noted for their thoughts on 
decolonization while augustine of hippo was born in tagaste about six zero 
miles from the present day city of annaba and ibn khaldun though born in tunis 
wrote the muqaddima while staying in algeria algerian culture has been strongly 
influenced by islam the main religion the works of the sanusi family in 
precolonial times and of emir abdelkader and sheikh ben badis in colonial times 
are widely noted the algerian musical genre best known abroad is ra a pop 
flavored opinionated take on folk music featuring international stars such as 
khaled and cheb mami however in algeria itself the older highly verbal chaabi 
style remains more popular with such stars as el hadj el anka or dahmane el 
harrachi while the tuneful melodies of kabyle music exemplified by idir ait 
menguellet or loun s matoub have a wide audience for more classical tastes 
andalusi music brought from al andalus by morisco refugees is preserved in many 
older coastal towns in painting mohammed khadda and m hemed issiakhem are 
notable in recent years picture gallery image houbel jpg the monument of the 
martyrs algiers image algernuit jpg algiers by night image finace jpg minister 
of the finances image makam echehid jpg algiers view by air image benyen jpg 
the forest bainem in algeria at bouzareah image algierssnow jpg snow on algiers 
image church saintcharlesalgiers jpg the church saint charles at algiers image 
pe algerie sahara zero one two one jpg sahara of algeria miscellaneous topics 
archeology of algeria communications in algeria foreign relations of algeria 
list of algeria related topics list of cities in algeria list of algerians list 
of sovereign states military of algeria transportation in algeria the battle of 
algiers movie algerian war of independence one nine five four one nine six two 
algerian civil war one nine nine one two zero zero two directories yellow pages 
of algeria external links government el mouradia official presidential site in 
french and arabic national people s assembly official parliamentary site the 
embassy of algeria in washington dc news allafrica com algeria news headline 
links el khabar the north africa journal business news overviews cia world 
factbook algeria library of congress country study algeria data as of december 
one nine nine three algeria the psychos will inherit the earth an irreverent 
look at algeria s military situation tourism other algeria watch human rights 
organization critical of widespread torture practiced by the r gime in french 
algeria s past needs opening not closing analysis on the public referendum held 
two nine september two zero zero five by veerle opgenhaffen and hanny megally 
all city of alg ria algerian english online dictionary african union member 
states algeria arab league peace and security council characters in ayn rand s 
novel atlas shrugged balph eubank called the literary leader of the age despite 
the fact that he is incapable of writing anything that people actually want to 
read what people want to read he says is irrelevant he complains that it is 
disgraceful that artists are treated as peddlers and that there should be a law 
limiting the sales of books to ten thousand copies he is a member of the 
looters balph eubank appears in section one six one ben nealy a railroad 
contractor whom dagny taggart hires to replace the track on the rio norte line 
with rearden metal nealy is incompetent but dagny can find no one better in all 
the country nealy believes that anything can get done with enough muscle power 
he sees no role for intelligence in human achievement and this is manifest in 
his inability to organize the project and to make decisions he relies on dagny 
and ellis wyatt to run things and resents them for doing it because it appears 
to him like they are just bossing people around ben nealy appears in section 
one seven one bertram scudder editorial writer for the magazine the future he 
typically bashes business and businessmen but he never says anything specific 
in his articles relying on innuendo sneers and denunciation he wrote a hatchet 
job on hank rearden called the octopus he is also vocal in support of the 
equalization of opportunity bill bertram scudder appears in section one six one 
betty pope a wealthy socialite who is having a meaningless sexual affair with 
james taggart that coincides with the overall meaninglessness of her life she 
regrets having to wake up every morning because she has to face another empty 
day she is deliberately crude in a way that casts ridicule on her high social 
position betty pope appears in sections one four two and one six one brakeman 
an unnamed employee working on the taggart comet train dagny taggart hears 
brakeman whistling the theme of a concerto when she asks him what piece it is 
from he says it is halley s fifth concerto when dagny points out that richard 
halley only wrote four concertos brakeman claims he made a mistake and he doesn 
t recall where he heard the piece later after dagny instructs the train crew 
how to proceed he asks a co worker who she is and learns she is the one who 
runs taggart transcontinental it is later discovered that the unknown brakeman 
is one of the strikers when dagny meets him in the valley brakeman appears in 
sections one one two and one one three cherryl brooks dime store shopgirl who 
marries james taggart after a chance encounter in her store the night the john 
galt line was deemed his greatest success she marries him thinking he is the 
heroic person behind taggart transcontinental she is horrible to dagny until 
the night before she commits suicide when she confesses to dagny that she 
married jim thinking she was marrying dagny like eddie willers cherryl is one 
representation of a good person who lacks the extraordinary capacities of the 
primary heroes of the novel claude slagenhop the president of political 
organization friends of global progress which is supported by philip rearden 
and one of lillian rearden s friends he believes that ideas are just air that 
this is no time for talk but for action he is not bothered by the fact that 
action unguided by ideas is random and pointless global progress is a sponsor 
of the equalization of opportunity bill claude slagenhop appears in section one 
six one cuffy meigs a looter who s assigned by wesley mouch to keep watch over 
the workings of taggart transcontinental and later assumes control over the 
company after dagny taggart leaves he carries a pistol and a lucky rabbit s 
foot he dresses in a military uniform the intellectual heir of dr robert 
stadler meigs comes to a fitting end at the hands of project x dagny taggart 
the main character in atlas shrugged also the name of her namesake mrs 
nathaniel taggart dagny is vice president in charge of operation at taggart 
transcontinental she is the female hero the counterpart to john galt her 
journey is the journey of the reader exploring and understanding galts 
philosophy those in the know understand that she is the one who really runs the 
railroad in the course of the novel she forms romantic liaisons with three men 
of ability francisco hank rearden and john galt in order john is the one who 
because of the sum total of his qualities will become the choice of dagny dagny 
appears in sections one one two one one three one one four one three two one 
three three one four one one four five one four six one four seven one four 
eight one five one one five two and one six one dan conway the middle aged 
president of the phoenix durango railroad running a railroad is just about the 
only thing he knows when the anti dog eat dog rule is used to drive his 
business out of colorado he loses the will to fight and resigns himself to a 
quiet life of books and fishing he claims that somebody had to be sacrificed it 
turned out to be him and he has no right to complain bowing to the will of the 
majority when pressed he says he doesn t really believe this is right but he 
can t understand why it is wrong and what the alternative might be he is 
trapped by a moral code that makes him a willing victim and rather than 
challenge that morality he simply gives up dan conway appears in sections one 
four five and one four six and is mentioned in section one four eight dick 
mcnamara a contractor who finished the san sebastian line and who is hired to 
lay the new rearden metal track for the rio norte line before he gets a chance 
to do so he mysteriously disappears dick mcnamara is mentioned in sections one 
three three and one four one eddie willers special assistant to the vice 
president in charge of operation at taggart transcontinental he grew up with 
dagny taggart his father and grandfather worked for the taggarts and he 
followed in their footsteps he is completely loyal to dagny and to taggart 
transcontinental he is also secretly in love with dagny willers is generally 
assumed to represent the common man someone who does not possess the promethian 
creative ability of the strikers but nevertheless matches them in moral courage 
and is capable of appreciating and making use of their creations eddie willers 
appears in sections one one one one one four one one seven one three two one 
three three one four one one five one and one five two ellis wyatt the head of 
wyatt oil he has almost single handedly revived the economy of colorado by 
discovering oil there of all the disappearances of industrialists in the novel 
wyatt s involving the fiery destruction of his oil wells is surely the most 
dramatic ellis wyatt is mentioned or appears in sections one one one one one 
four one three two one four six one four seven one four eight and one five two 
francisco d anconia one of the central characters in atlas shrugged by all 
accounts he is a worthless millionaire playboy owner by inheritance of the 
world s largest copper mining empire the man behind the san sebastian mines and 
a childhood friend and first love of dagny taggart francisco began working on 
the sly as a teenager in order to learn all he could about business while still 
a student at patrick henry university he began working at a copper foundry and 
investing in the stock market by the time he was twenty he had made enough to 
purchase the foundry he began working for d anconia copper as assistant 
superintendent of a mine in montana but was quickly promoted to head of the new 
york office he took over d anconia copper at age two three after the death of 
his father when he was two six francisco secretly joined the strikers and began 
to slowly destroy the d anconia empire so the looters could not get it he 
adopted the persona of a worthless playboy by which he is known to the world as 
an effective cover his full name is francisco domingo carlos andres sebastian d 
anconia according to mailto areed two calstatela edu adam reed who is francisco 
d anconia d anconia is the only hero class character who is recognizably jewish 
not in the religious but in the historical sense like ayn rand herself 
francisco d anconia appears or is mentioned in sections one three two one four 
one one four four one five one and one five two this last section includes a 
detailed history of his life hank rearden one of the central characters in 
atlas shrugged he is the founder of rearden steel and the inventor of rearden 
metal he lives in philadelphia with his wife lillian his brother philip and an 
elderly woman known only as rearden s mother all of whom he supports gwen ives 
is his secretary the character of hank rearden has two important roles to play 
in the novel first he is in the same position as the reader in that he is aware 
that there is something wrong with the world but is not sure what it is rearden 
is guided toward an understanding of the solution through his friendship with 
francisco d anconia who does know the secret and by this mechanism the reader 
is also prepared to understand the secret when it is revealed explicitly in 
galt s speech second rearden is used to illustrate rand s theory of sex lillian 
rearden cannot appreciate hank rearden s virtues and she is portrayed as being 
disgusted by sex dagny taggart clearly does appreciate rearden s virtues and 
this appreciation evolves into a sexual desire rearden is torn by a 
contradiction because he accepts the premises of the traditional view of sex as 
a lower instinct while responding sexually to dagny who represents his highest 
values rearden struggles to resolve this internal conflict and in doing so 
illustrates rand s sexual theory rearden appears in sections one two one one 
three two one four seven and one six one and is mentioned in sections one one 
four and one three one hugh akston identified as one of the last great 
advocates of reason he was a renowned philosopher and the head of the 
department of philosophy at patrick henry university where he taught francisco 
d anconia john galt and ragnar danneskj ld he was along with robert stadler a 
father figure to these three akston s name is so hallowed that a young lady on 
hearing that francisco had studied under him is shocked she thought he must 
have been one of those great names from an earlier century hugh akston is 
mentioned in section one six one james taggart the president of taggart 
transcontinental and a leader of the looters taggart is an expert influence 
peddler who is incapable of making decisions on his own he relies on his sister 
dagny taggart to actually run the railroad but nonetheless opposes her in 
almost every endeavor in a sense he is the antithesis of dagny as the novel 
progresses the moral philosophy of the looters is revealed it is a code of 
nihilism the goal of this code is to not exist to become a zero taggart 
struggles to remain unaware that this is his goal he maintains his pretence 
that he wants to live and becomes horrified whenever his mind starts to grasp 
the truth about himself this contradiction leads to the recurring absurdity of 
his life the desire to destroy those on whom his life depends and the horror 
that he will succeed at this james taggart appears in sections one one one one 
one four one three one one three two one four three one four four one five two 
and one six one and is mentioned in sections one four six and one four eight 
john galt the question who is john galt is asked repeatedly throughout atlas 
shrugged late into the book we learn that john galt is the man who stopped the 
motor of the world and the leader of the strikers he is also the same character 
as the mystery worker the son of an ohio garage mechanic galt left home at age 
one two and began college at patrick henry university at age one six there he 
befriended francisco d anconia and ragnar danneskj ld all three of whom double 
majored in physics and philosophy they were the cherished students of the 
brilliant scientist robert stadler and the brilliant philosopher hugh akston 
after graduating galt became an engineer at the twentieth century motor works 
where he designed a revolutionary new motor powered by ambient static 
electricity with the potential to change the world like ellis wyatt he has 
created what many had for years said was impossible when the company owners 
decided to run the factory by the collectivist maxim by each according to his 
ability to each according to his need galt organized a successful labor strike 
proclaiming his promise to stop the motor of the world he began traversing the 
globe meeting the world s most successful businessmen systematically convincing 
them to follow in his footsteps one by one they began abandoning their business 
empires which galt convinced them were doomed to failure anyhow given the 
increased nationalization of industry by the government secretly these captains 
of industry led by galt and banker midas mulligan had created their own society 
a secret enclave of rational individualists living in galt s gulch a town 
secluded high in a wilderness of mountains dagny accidentally finds the town 
and a shocked john galt by crash landing a light aircraft while pursuing 
quentin daniels since everyone across the country is repeating the phrase who 
is john galt it is natural that many people have attempted to answer that 
question the phrase becomes an expression of helplessness and despair at the 
current state of the world dagny taggart hears a number of john galt legends 
before finding the real john galt and eventually joining his cause and learning 
that all of the stories have an element of truth to them there is a clothing 
store in vail colorado called john galt ltd one presumes that on occasion a 
customer unknowingly walks in and asks who is john galt lillian rearden the 
wildly unsupportive wife of hank rearden they have been married eight years as 
the novel begins lillian is a frigid moocher who seeks to destroy her husband 
she compares being rearden s wife with owning the world s most powerful horse 
since she cannot comfortably ride a horse that goes too fast she must bridle it 
down to her level even if that means it will never reach its full potential and 
its power will be greviously wasted lillian also serves to illustrate rand s 
theory of sex she believes sex is a base animal instinct and that sexual 
indulgence is a sign of moral weakness she is incapable of feeling this kind of 
desire which she believes testifies to her moral superiority however according 
to the theory of sex lillian s lack of sexual capacity results from her 
inability to experience value in herself she is therefore unable to respond 
sexually when she experiences value in others lillian tolerates sex with her 
husband only because she is realistic enough to know he is just a brute who 
requires satisfaction of his brute instincts in section one six one she 
indicates that she abhors francisco d anconia because she believes he is a 
sexual adventurer lillian rearden appears in sections one two one and one six 
one the looters a group of evil characters sometimes referred to as james 
taggart and his friends they are similar to the moochers the looters consist of 
men and women who use force to obtain value from those who produce it they seek 
to destroy the producers despite the fact that they are dependent upon them the 
looters include mr thompson balph eubank floyd ferris james taggart orren boyle 
paul larkin robert stadler simon pritchett wesley mouch and cuffy miegs midas 
mulligan a wealthy banker who mysteriously disappears in protest after he is 
given a court order to loan money to an incompetent loan applicant midas 
mulligan is responsible for the creation and distribution of the money that is 
exclusively used in galt s gulch and is the original owner of the land where 
galt s gulch is located he is also responsible for the production of the money 
used there the moochers a group of characters similar to the looters who use 
guilt as a weapon against those who produce value they seek to destroy the 
producers despite the fact that they are dependent upon them the moochers 
include lillian rearden philip rearden and hank rearden s mother mort liddy a 
hack composer who writes trite scores for movies and modern symphonies that no 
one listens to he believes melody is a primitive vulgarity he is one of lillian 
rearden s friends and a member of the cultural elite mort liddy appears in 
section one six one mr mowen the president of the amalgamated switch and signal 
company inc of connecticut he is a businessman who sees nothing wrong with the 
moral code that is destroying society and would never dream of saying he is in 
business for any reason other than the good of society he is unable to grapple 
with abstract issues and is frightened of anything controversial dagny taggart 
hires mr mowen to produce switches made of rearden metal he is reluctant to 
build anything with this unproven technology and has to be ridden and cajoled 
before he is willing to accept the contract when pressured by public opinion he 
discontinues production of the switches forcing dagny to find an alternative 
source mr mowen appears in section one seven one mystery worker a menial worker 
for taggart transcontinental who often dines with eddie willers in the employee 
s cafeteria eddie finds him very easy to talk to and mystery worker not so 
subtly leads him on so that eddie reveals important information about dagny 
taggart and taggart transcontinental eddie tells him which suppliers and 
contractors dagny is most dependent on and with remarkable consistency those 
are the next men to disappear mysteriously mystery worker is actually john galt 
mystery worker appears in section one three three the unnamed newsstand owner 
he works in the taggart terminal twenty years ago he owned a cigarette factory 
but it went under and he s been working at his newsstand ever since he is a 
collector of cigarettes and knows every brand ever made he occasionally chats 
with dagny taggart when she comes by on one occasion in section one three two 
after dagny asks him about his collection he bemoans the fact that there are no 
new brands and the old brands are all disappearing he examines a cigarette 
given to dagny by hugh akston but it is a new brand that he has never seen 
before it carries the sign of the dollar in his first appearance the newsstand 
owner likens the fire of a cigarette to the fire of the mind this alludes to 
the greek myth of prometheus who gave mankind the gift of fire allowing it to 
raise itself up and become civilized in atlas shrugged it is the mind of man 
that raises mankind thus the cigarettes become symbolic of the men of the mind 
the disappearance of the old brands represents the disappearance of the men of 
the mind and the newsstand owner s discovery of the new brand foreshadows dagny 
s discovery of a new kind of men of the mind orren boyle the head of associated 
steel and a friend of james taggart he is one of the looters he is an investor 
in the san sebastian mines orren boyle appears or is mentioned in sections one 
one one one one four one three one one three two one four four and one five two 
owen kellogg assistant to the manager of the taggart terminal in new york he 
catches dagny taggart s eye as one of the few competent men on staff after 
seeing the sorry state of the ohio division she decides to make him to its new 
superintendent however as soon as she returns to new york kellogg informs her 
that he is quitting his job he admits that he loves his work but that s not 
enough to keep him he won t say why he is leaving or what he will do later he 
is noticed working as transient labor by the unsuccessful unmotivated 
businessman mr mowen owen kellog eventually reaches and settles in atlantis 
owen kellogg appears in sections one one two and one one four paul larkin an 
unsuccessful middle aged businessman a friend of the rearden family and a 
member of the looters in section one two one larkin visits philadelphia to warn 
hank rearden of possible trouble from washington in section one three one he 
meets with the other looters to work out a plan to bring rearden down james 
taggart knows he is friends with hank rearden and challenges his loyalty and 
larkin assures taggart that he will go along with them paul larkin appears in 
sections one two one one three two and two a one philip rearden the younger 
brother of hank rearden and a moocher he lives in his brother s home in 
philadelphia and is completely dependent on him he believes that the source of 
his sustenance is evil and would love to see him destroyed he has never had a 
career and spends his time perfunctorily working for various social groups he 
becomes resentful of his brother s charity he then requests that he be granted 
a job from his brother because he should not have to be burdened by the feeling 
of inadequacy of not earning his own livelihood when confronted by his brother 
on how this job should be a mutually beneficial arrangement philip shrugs the 
argument off as irrelevant and that the job should be entitled to him solely 
based on his need for money and the fact of familial ties philip rearden 
appears in sections one two one and one six one quentin daniels an enterprising 
engineer hired by dagny taggart to reconstruct john galt s motor partway 
through this process quentin withdraws his effort for the same reasons john 
galt himself had dagny sets out to meet quentin in hopes of convincing him to 
resume his work john galt narrowly gets to him first dagny s pursuit of quentin 
leads her to galt s gulch ragnar danneskj ld one of the original strikers he is 
now world famous as a pirate ragnar was from norway the son of a bishop and the 
scion of one of norway s most ancient noble families he attended patrick henry 
university and became friends with john galt and francisco d anconia while 
studying under hugh akston and robert stadler ragnar seizes relief ships that 
are being sent from the united states to europe no one knows what he does with 
the goods he seizes as the novel progresses ragnar begins for the first time to 
become active in american waters and is even spotted in delaware bay reportedly 
his ship is better than any available in the fleets of the world s navies when 
he became a pirate he was disowned and excommunicated there is a price on his 
head in norway portugal turkey according to ayn rand verbal report his name is 
a tribute to victor hugo in hugo s first novel hans of iceland the hero becomes 
the first of the counts of danneskj ld his name may be a pun on dane s gold 
although skj ld means shield not gold ragnar danneskj ld appears in section one 
six one rearden s mother named gertrude she is a moocher who lives with her son 
hank rearden at his home in philadelphia she is involved in church based 
charity work and berates rearden whenever she can she insults him by saying he 
was always selfish even as a child she dotes on her weak son philip rearden 
rearden s mother appears in section one two one richard halley dagny taggart s 
favorite composer who mysteriously disappeared after the evening of his 
greatest triumph in section one four one we learn that richard halley spent 
years as a struggling and unappreciated composer at age two four his opera 
phaethon was performed for the first time to an audience who booed and heckled 
it it was based on the greek myth in which phaethon steals his father s chariot 
and dies in an audacious attempt to drive the sun across the sky halley changed 
the story though into one of triumph in which phaethon succeeds for years 
halley wrote in obscurity after nineteen years phaethon was performed again but 
this time it was received to the greatest ovation the opera house had ever 
heard it appears his critics felt he had paid his dues long enough that he was 
at last worthy of their approval the following day halley retired sold the 
rights to his music and disappeared richard halley is mentioned in sections one 
one two one one four one three three and one four one and appears in section 
one five two dr robert stadler a former professor at patrick henry university 
mentor to francisco d anconia john galt and ragnar danneskj ld he has since 
become a sell out one who had great promise but squandered it for social 
approval to the detriment of the free he works at the state science institute 
where all his inventions are perverted for use by the military including the 
instrument of his demise project x dr simon pritchett the prestigious head of 
the department of philosophy at patrick henry university and is considered the 
leading philosopher of the age he is also a looter he is certainly 
representative of the philosophy of the age he is a crude reductionist who 
believes man is nothing but a collection of chemicals he believes there are no 
standards that definitions are fluid reason is a superstition that it is futile 
to seek meaning in life and that the duty of a philosopher is to show that 
nothing can be understood he explains all this in his book the metaphysical 
contradictions of the universe and at cocktail parties dr pritchett appears in 
section one six one the strikers people of the mind who go on strike because 
they do not appreciate being exploited by the looters and demonized by a 
society who depends on them for its very existence the leader of the strikers 
is john galt other strikers include hugh akston francisco d anconia ragnar 
danneskj ld richard halley and the brakeman characters who join the strikers in 
the course of the book include dagny taggart ellis wyatt hank rearden dick 
mcnamara and owen kellogg mr thompson the head of the state which essentially 
means that he s the president of the united states though he s never 
specifically referred to as such in the world of atlas shrugged all presidents 
and prime ministers are referred to simply as head of the state and mr this is 
because countries have been standardized as people s states which seem to share 
a common form of government thomspon s title can thus be seen as reflecting the 
fact that the us is in the process of evolving into one of these people s 
states one of the looters he s not particularly intelligent and has a very 
undistinguished look he knows politics however and is a master of public 
relations and back room deals rand s notes indicate that she modelled him on 
president harry s truman wesley mouch a member of the looters and at the 
beginning of the storyline the incompetent lobbyist whom hank rearden 
reluctantly employs in washington initially wesley mouch is the least powerful 
and least significant of the looters the other members of this group feel they 
can look down upon him with impunity eventually he becomes the most powerful 
looter and the country s economic dictator thereby illustrating rand s belief 
that a government run economy places too much power in the hands of incompetent 
bureaucrats who would never have positions of similar influence in a private 
sector business wesley mouch appears in section one three one and is mentioned 
in section one six one see also minor characters in atlas shrugged atlas 
shrugged lists of fictional characters technology in atlas shrugged ayn rand s 
novel includes a variety of technological products and devices in addition to 
real world technology aircraft automobiles diesel engines phonograph records 
radios telephones television and traffic signals atlas shrugged also includes 
various fictional technologies or fictional variants on real inventions 
fictional technology fictional inventions mentioned in the book include 
refractor rays gulch mirage rearden metal a sonic death ray project x voice 
activated door locks gulch power station motors powered by static electricity 
palm activated door locks galt s ny lab shale oil drilling and a nerve 
induction torture machine traffic signals early on the book mentions the 
screech of a traffic signal as it changes this implies the older technology of 
mechanical traffic signals the kind which displayed a pennant or flag 
indicating stop or go and the inverse indicator in the opposite direction 
traffic signals using lights have been around for over four zero years so 
anything of this type is very old compared to today project x project x is an 
invention of the scientists at the state science institute requiring tons of 
rearden metal basically it is a death ray and is capable of destroying anything 
the scientists claim that the project will be used to preserve peace and squash 
rebellion it is destroyed towards the end of the book and emits a pulse of 
radiation that destroys everything in the surrounding area including cuffy 
meigs and dr stadler as well as the taggart bridge rearden metal rearden metal 
is a fictitious metal alloy invented by hank rearden it is lighter than 
traditional steel but stronger and is to steel what steel was to iron it is 
described as greenish blue among its ingredients are iron and copper initially 
no one is willing to use rearden metal because no one wants to stick his neck 
out and be the first to try it finally dagny taggart places an order for 
rearden metal when she needs rails to rebuild the dying rio norte line the 
first thing made from rearden metal is a bracelet rearden metal is mentioned in 
sections one one four one two one one three one one four eight and one six one 
galt s motor john galt invented a new type of electrical apparatus described in 
the book as a motor however it does not operate like a motor in the common use 
of the word today it is capable of harnessing transforming and applying energy 
in many ways other than mechanical galt s motor was capable of jamming all 
radio receivers on earth and completely destroying the contents of galt s booby 
trapped laboratory without causing collateral structural damage though rand 
describes it as turning static electricity into useful mechanical work its 
operation is more reminiscent of modern speculation about zero point energy 
dagny discovers a discarded prototype of the motor and it is superficially 
described in section part one chapter nine galt shows dagny the motor and 
describes it in section part three chapter one atlas shrugged fictional 
technology companies in atlas shrugged the ayn rand novel generally are divided 
into two groups these that are operated by sympathetic characters are given the 
name of the owner while companies operated by evil or incompetent characters 
are given generic names in atlas shrugged men who give their names to their 
companies all become strikers in due time amalgamated switch and signal a 
company run by mr mowen and located in connecticut they have supplied taggart 
transcontinental for generations dagny taggart orders rearden metal switches 
from them amalgamated switch and signal appears in section one seven one 
associated steel associated steel is the company owned by orren boyle the 
company was started with just a few hundred thousand dollars of boyle s own 
money and hundreds of millions of dollars in government grants boyle used this 
money to buy out his competitors and now relies on influence peddling and 
political favors to run his business associated steel is mentioned in sections 
one one one one one four one three one and one seven one ayers music publishing 
company ayers music publishing company is the publisher of the music of richard 
halley dagny taggart contacts mr ayers to inquire as to the existence of halley 
s fifth concerto ayers music publishing company is mentioned in section one one 
four barton and jones the company located in denver that supplies food for the 
workers rebuilding the rio norte line they go bankrupt in the middle of the 
project barton and james is mentioned in section one seven one d anconia copper 
a copper and mining company founded by sebastian d anconia in argentina during 
the time of the inquisition each man who ran the company saw it grow by one 
zero in his lifetime so by the time francisco d anconia heads the company it is 
the largest in the world his dream from childhood is to increase the size of 
the company by one zero zero d anconia copper is mentioned in sections one five 
two and one seven one hammond motors a car company in colorado they make the 
best cars on the market until the founder disappears hank rearden buys a 
hammond on his trip to colorado in section one seven one incorporated tool a 
company that is contracted to deliver drill heads to taggart transcontinental 
but who fail to do this it is mentioned in section one seven one phoenix 
durango the phoenix durango is an old small railroad located in the southwest 
run by dan conway that has been insignificant for most of its existence however 
the phoenix durango grows rapidly when ellis wyatt revives the economy of 
colorado and taggart transcontinental s rio norte line fails to service wyatt 
adequately later james taggart conspires to get the phoenix durango driven out 
of colorado with the anti dog eat dog rule the phoenix durango is mentioned in 
sections one one one one one four one three one alluded to one three two one 
four five one four six one four seven and one five two rearden coal a business 
founded by hank rearden prior to the founding of rearden steel it is mentioned 
in section one two one rearden limestone a business founded by hank rearden 
prior to the founding of rearden steel it is mentioned in section one two one 
rearden ore the first business founded by hank rearden it is mentioned in 
section one two one rearden steel a company founded by hank rearden about ten 
years prior to the start of the story in the novel rearden bought an abandoned 
steel mill in philadelphia at a time when all the experts thought that such a 
venture would be hopeless he turned it into the most reliable and profitable 
steel company in the country as dagny taggart struggles to save taggart 
transcontinental she becomes increasingly dependent on rearden steel rearden 
steel is mentioned in sections one one one one one four one two one one three 
one alluded to one six one and one six two summit casting a company in illinois 
under contract to deliver rail spikes to taggart transcontinental they go 
bankrupt before they can deliver prompting dagny taggart to fly to chicago and 
buy the company to get it started again summit casting is mentioned in section 
one seven one taggart transcontinental the fictional railroad run by dagny 
taggart her commitment to the railroad creates one of the book s major 
conflicts taggart transcontinental was founded by nathaniel taggart who lived 
three generations or so prior to dagny s generation it was built without any 
grants loans or favors from the government and was the last railroad that was 
still owned and controlled by its founder s descendants its motto is from ocean 
to ocean the flagship of taggart transcontinental is the taggart comet which 
runs from new york to san francisco and which has never been late united 
locomotive works an incompetent company that is supposed to deliver diesel 
engines to taggart transcontinental the order is delayed in perpetuity and the 
president of the company refuses to ever give a straight answer as to why this 
is so the united locomotive works is mentioned in sections one three three and 
one four one wyatt oil the oil company run by ellis wyatt wyatt s father had 
squeezed a living out of the oil fields in colorado but when ellis wyatt took 
over the business took off he discovered a technique for extracting oil from 
wells that had been abandoned as dried up the success of wyatt oil that 
followed this discovery suddenly and unexpectedly turned colorado into the 
leading economy in the country wyatt oil traditionally relied on taggart 
transcontinental s rio norte line to ship its oil but when that company could 
not grow fast enough to keep up with the booming colorado economy wyatt started 
using the small but well managed phoenix durango instead this prompted james 
taggart to make deals with his friends to drive the phoenix durango out of 
colorado afterwards dagny taggart has to rebuild the rio norte line so it can 
supply transportation to wyatt oil if she fails the economy of colorado and of 
the whole country could collapse wyatt oil is mentioned in sections one one one 
one three two and one seven one atlas shrugged fictional companies some of the 
important concepts discussed in atlas shrugged include the sanction of the 
victim and the theory of sex sanction of the victim the sanction of the victim 
is defined as the willingness of the good to suffer at the hands of the evil to 
accept the role of sacrificial victim for the sin of creating values the entire 
story of atlas shrugged can be seen as an answer to the question what would 
happen if this sanction was revoked when atlas shrugs relieving himself of the 
burden of carrying the world he is revoking his sanction the concept is 
supposedly original in the thinking of ayn rand and is foundational to her 
moral theory she holds that evil is a parasite on the good and can only exist 
if the good tolerates it to quote from galt s speech evil is impotent and has 
no power but that which we let it extort from us and i saw that evil was 
impotent and the only weapon of its triumph was the willingness of the good to 
serve it morality requires that we do not sanction our own victimhood rand 
claims in adhering to this concept rand assigns virtue to the trait of 
selfishness throughout atlas shrugged numerous characters admit that there is 
something wrong with the world but they cannot put their finger on what it is 
the concept they cannot grasp is the sanction of the victim the first person to 
grasp the concept is john galt who vows to stop the motor of the world by 
getting the creators of the world to withhold their sanction we first glimpse 
the concept in section one two one when hank rearden feels he is duty bound to 
support his family despite their hostility towards him in section one four six 
the principle is stated explicitly by dan conway i suppose somebody s got to be 
sacrificed if it turned out to be me i have no right to complain theory of sex 
in rejecting the traditional christian altruist moral code rand also rejects 
the sexual code that in her view is a logical implication of altruism rand 
introduces a theory of sex in atlas shrugged which is purportedly implied by 
her broader ethical and psychological theories far from being a debasing animal 
instinct sex is the highest celebration of our greatest values sex is a 
physical response to intellectual and spiritual values a mechanism for giving 
concrete expression to values that could otherwise only be experienced in the 
abstract one is sexually attracted to those who embody one s values those who 
have base values will be attracted to baseness to those who also have ignoble 
values those who lack any clear purpose will find sex devoid of meaning people 
of high values will respond sexually to those who embody high values that our 
sexual desire is a response to the embodiment of our values in others is a 
radical and original theory however even those who are sympathetic to this 
theory have criticized it as being incomplete for instance since according to 
rand the economy is also such an expression of values and since it is always 
possible to encounter someone who embodies one s values more completely this 
would seem to make family undesirable indeed rand treats family as a sort of 
trap furthermore promiscuity prostitution and an endless round robin of values 
driven sexual relationships would become inevitable from this viewpoint one 
could say that aldous huxley portrayed the ideal sexual state brave new world 
features humans who are incapable of deviating from their caste oriented values 
which naturally include a code of sexual desirability her sexual theory is 
illustrated in the contrasting relationships of hank rearden with lillian 
rearden and dagny taggart and later with dagny taggart and john galt other 
important illustrations of this theory are found in section one five two 
recounts dagny s relationship with francisco d anconia section one six one 
recounts hank and lillian rearden s courtship and lillian s attitude towards 
sex atlas shrugged this is a list of general items in ayn rand s atlas shrugged 
anti dog eat dog rule the anti dog eat dog rule is passed by the national 
alliance of railroads in section one four five allegedly to prevent destructive 
competition between railroads the rule gives the alliance the authority to 
forbid competition between railroads in certain parts of the country it was 
crafted by orren boyle as a favor for james taggart with the purpose of driving 
the phoenix durango out of colorado bracelet the very first thing made from 
rearden metal is a bracelet the bracelet is used to illustrate rand s theory of 
sex the bracelet symbolizes the value created by hank rearden s long struggle 
to invent rearden metal when he gives it to lillian rearden as a present in 
section one two one she says it s fully as valuable as a piece of railroad 
rails however lillian fully grasps the significance of the gift her snide 
remark is her way of denigrating her husband s ethos in section one six one 
lillian wears this bracelet at a party thrown on her anniversary she makes fun 
of it all night long and when dagny taggart hears lillian say she would gladly 
trade it for a common diamond bracelet dagny takes her up on it lillian later 
asks for it back upon realizing her power over her husband was slowly 
diminishing dagny denies the offer the bracelet appears in sections one two one 
and one six one cub club a night club in new york when francisco d anconia 
returns to new york in section one four one he explains he came because of a 
hat check girl at the cub club and the liverwurst at moe s delicatessen on 
third avenue equalization of opportunity bill a bill designed by the looters 
that proposes to limit the number of businesses any one person can own to one 
it is aimed primarily at hank rearden who uses rearden ore to guarantee rearden 
steel with a supply of iron ore by passing this bill the looters can seize 
rearden s other businesses for themselves and then deny him the iron he needs 
to run his steel mills the looters claim the bill is meant to give a chance to 
the little guy the equalization of opportunity bill is appears in section one 
six one galt s gulch a secluded refuge in a valley of colorado where the men of 
ability have retreated after relinquishing participation in american society 
nicknamed galt s gulch by its inhabitants it is in fact the property of midas 
mulligan one of the early strikers to follow john galt s call this call was to 
the great men of mind and action to abandon the increasingly slave state 
inclinations of a decaying united states to go on strike thereby withdrawing 
the only thing supporting the parasites and looters sarcastically nicknamed 
midas in the press because everything he seemed to touch turned to gold 
mulligan adopted the nickname during his explosive investment career before 
dropping out of sight he had purchased this land among his far ranging 
speculative endeavors and subsequently retreated to it upon his disappearance 
other strikers soon followed him there including john galt renting or buying 
land for summer retreats as a respite from continuing their search for fellow 
strikers among the increasingly collapsing american society eventually a 
society develops in galt s gulch as more people live there year round as the 
outside world becomes virtually unsafe to visit we are introduced to galt s 
gulch in the final section of the novel in the first chapter entitled atlantis 
the people live with each other in completely free society and embody 
everything which is the thesis of the novel the appropriate values for a 
society of mankind philosophical moral economic legal aesthetic and sexual 
among others too numerous to mention we find industrious ambitious happy people 
continuing their chosen fields of endeavor without the yokes of any taxation or 
regulation conversely there is a reverence for private property everything 
transacted is paid for with the re invented currency of solid gold coin struck 
from the reserves of midas mulligan s bank which now resides in the valley the 
townspeople receive services from the various heroes we have met throughout the 
novel who all now reside and produce in the valley they purchase power 
inexpensively from galt and his invention of the static electricity motor 
maintain their anonymity from the outside world via galt s invention of the air 
wave reflection device giving the view from above the camouflage of reflected 
images of other mountainsides nearby and some attend galt s lectures on physics 
where he explains his discoveries on new fundamental laws and applied 
mathematics the people purchase medical treatment from the care of dr hendricks 
who uses his invention of a portable x ray machine to initially diagnose dagny 
taggart upon her crash landing into the valley attend concerts of new musical 
compositions of richard halley who has continued to compose in the valley 
acquire raw materials from the efforts of francisco d anconia s excavations 
around the valley attend philosophy lectures from the now retired pirate ragnar 
danneskj ld receive loans from midas mulligan etc rand s description of galt s 
gulch was inspired by a visit she and her husband frank o connor took to ouray 
colorado while researching colorado for the novel halley s fifth concerto 
richard halley disappeared after he had written only four concertos in section 
one one two dagny taggart an enthusiastic fan of halley s music hears an 
unfamiliar theme being whistled by a brakeman on the taggart comet she asks him 
what it is he responds halley s fifth concerto when dagny says halley only 
wrote four concertos the brakeman says he made a mistake and denies knowing 
what the song was later dagny calls mr ayers to find out if halley wrote a 
fifth concerto ayers says halley did not halley s fifth concerto is mentioned 
in sections one one two one one four and one five two halley s fourth concerto 
the last thing richard halley wrote before he disappeared it is a song of 
rebellion and defiance that seemed to say agony and suffering were not 
necessary dagny taggart listened to this piece in section one four one it is 
mentioned in section one five two heaven s in your backyard a film mort liddy 
wrote the score using a bastardized version of halley s fourth concerto it is 
mentioned in section one six one john galt legends since everyone across the 
country is asking who is john galt it is not surprising that some people have 
come up with answers a number of john galt legends are told each of which 
ironically turns out to be true at least symbolically legend one section one 
six one a spinster at lillian rearden s party tells dagny the story john galt 
was a man of inestimable wealth who found the sunken island of atlantis while 
fighting the worst storm ever wreaked upon the world the sight was so beautiful 
that having seen it he could never go back to the world so he sank his ship and 
took his fortune down with him the actual john galt was a man who created 
something of inestimable value a new motor and who discovered the secret to 
what was wrong with the world while fighting the most evil social philosophy 
ever put into practice the world he envisioned was so beautiful that he refused 
to live in the world that was and disappeared taking the secret of motor with 
him atlantis the isles of the blessed is a place where no one could enter 
except those who had the spirit of a hero described in these terms it is the 
same as galt s gulch moe s delicatessen a delicatessen in new york when 
francisco d anconia returns to new york in section one four one he explains he 
came because of a hat check girl at the cub club and the liverwurst at moe s 
delicatessen on third avenue national alliance of railroads an industry group 
formed to promote the welfare of the industry as a whole requiring members to 
sacrifice their individual interests for the common good orren boyle has 
friends on the national alliance of railroads and he gets them to support the 
anti dog eat dog rule which uses a string of pretenses to drive the phoenix 
durango out of colorado the national alliance of railroads is mentioned in 
sections one three one one four five and one four six national council of metal 
industries an industry group that uses political pull to get its way james 
taggart has friends on the national council of metal industries and he gets 
them to support legislation that will hurt rearden steel and help associated 
steel the national council of metal industries is mentioned in section one 
three one patrick henry university the most prestigious university in the world 
it was attended by john galt francisco d anconia and ragnar danneskjold where 
they met and became friends hugh akston and robert stadler taught there it is 
located in cleveland rio norte line a branch of taggart transcontinental that 
runs from cheyenne wyoming to el paso texas it is mentioned in sections one one 
one one one four one three one alluded to one three two one three three one 
four one one four six one four seven and one four eight rockdale station a 
station on the taggart transcontinental line located five miles from the 
taggart estate and overlooking the hudson river it was the site of dagny 
taggart s first job with the railroad night operator at age one six it appears 
in section one five two san sebastian a community built to house the workers of 
the san sebastian mines and their families as it turns out the houses roads and 
everything of practical value is built so poorly that the community can be 
expected to fall apart within a year or two only the church was built to last 
it is mentioned in section one five two san sebastian line a branch of taggart 
transcontinental that serves the san sebastian mines in mexico the mines were 
developed by francisco d anconia and attracted significant investments from 
james taggart and orren boyle who assumed francisco could be counted on to 
deliver a winner the san sebastian line is nationalized by the mexican 
government soon after completion when it is nationalized in section one four 
two it is referred to as the san sebastian railroad it is mentioned in sections 
one one four one three one one three two one three three one four two one four 
three and one five two san sebastian mines san sebastian mines is a copper 
mining project in mexico founded by francisco d anconia and named after his 
ancestor sebastian d anconia francisco s reputation as a businessman is so 
great that investors flock to him begging to invest money in the enterprise 
investors include james taggart and orren boyle taggart goes so far as to build 
a new branch of taggart transcontinental the san sebastian line to serve the 
mines sinking three zero million into the project when the development of the 
mines appears complete the mexican government nationalizes them as well as the 
san sebastian line only to discover there is no copper and there never was when 
taggart tells francisco he considers the mines a rotten swindle section one six 
one francisco explains that taggart should be pleased with the way he ran the 
mines he says he put into practice those moral precepts that were accepted 
around the world the world says it is evil to pursue a profit he got no profit 
from the worthless mines the world says the purpose of an enterprise is not to 
produce but to give a livelihood to its employees it produced nothing but 
created jobs that would never have existed if one was only concerned with 
developing a real mine the world says the owner is an exploiter and the workers 
do all the real work he left the enterprise entirely in the hands of the 
workers and did not burden anyone with his presence the world says need is more 
important than ability he hired a mining specialist who needed a job very badly 
but had no ability in short the san sebastian mines were an illustration of 
what happens when this moral code is put into practice and a warning of what 
will soon happen to the world as a whole the san sebastian mines appear in 
